UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology1
UK Catalysis:
Innovation opportunities for 
an enabling technology
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology21. Ex ecutive summary 4
2. Introduction 8
2.1. R eport background  8
2.2. Wh y Catalysis? Why now?  8
2.3. Ca talysis and the UK’s national strategy  9
2.3.1.  Ne w catalyst development and the UK Grand Challenges  11
3. Global and dome stic catalysis market 12
3.1. Mark et overview 12
3.2. UK mark et opportunities 19
4. In tegrated catalyst and process design for industrial application and faster adoption 22
5. Clean gr owth 24
5.1. Clean gr owth Introduction  24
5.2. Hy drogen generation  27
5.2.1.  Blue h ydrogen  27
5.2.2.  Gr een hydrogen  28
5.3. CO2 utilisation  28
5.4. W aste to chemicals and fuels  30
5.4.1.  Gasifica tion of waste and upgrading of waste syngas  31
5.4.2.  W aste plastic to chemicals and fuels  31
5.4.3.  Utilis ation of biomass  33
5.5. Clean air  33
5.6. W ater treatment and catalysis  36
5.7. Other opp ortunities  40
5.7.1.  P olymer and rubber  40
5.7.2.  Carb on efficiency  40
5.8. Clean gr owth conclusion  40
6. Health y ageing/pharmaceutical manufacturing 42
6.1. In troduction to healthy ageing/pharmaceutical manufacturing  42
6.2. Pharmac eutical manufacturing  42
6.2.1.  Smar t manufacturing of pharmaceuticals  44
6.2.1.1.  Con tinuous and pseudo-continuous manufacturing  44
6.2.1.2.  Combine d chemo and biocatalysis  46
6.2.2.  Ca talysts for new chemistries  47
6.2.2.1.  Non P GM catalysed processes  47
6.2.3.  F aster development cycles  49
6.2.3.1.  Pr edictive modelling  49
6.2.3.2.  High thr oughput experimentation (HTE)  50
6.3. Health y ageing/pharma manufacturing conclusion  51Contents
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology37. UK and in ternational catalysis capability 52
7.1. Ov erview of UK academia  52
7.2. Ov erview of UK national catalysis capabilities  55
7.3. In ternational capability  55
7.3.1.1.  RealCat  56
7.3.1.2.  C AT Catalytic Centre  56
7.3.1.3.  CaRLa  57
7.3.2.  Ex ample of International RTO capabilities  59
7.3.2.1.  VTT  59
7.4. Ca talysis capability conclusions  59
8. UK ca talysis conclusions 63
8.1. Mark et opportunity  63
8.2. Driving v alue for the UK today  64
8.3. UK Capabilitie s  65
8.4. R ecommendations for catalysis innovation support  65
8.4.1.  A ccess to UK catalysis capabilities  66
8.4.2.  Collab orative Research & Development (cR&D)  66
8.4.3.  Clean gr owth demonstrator projects  67
8.4.4.  Expansion of UK ca talysis capabilities  68
8.5. Clo sing remarks  68
9. Appendices 70
9.1. App endix 1:  Examples of UK capabilities  70
9.1.1.  Ex amples of UK industrial catalysis capabilities (non exhaustive)  70
9.1.2.  Ex amples of UK academic capabilities (non exhaustive)  70
9.2. App endix 2:  Additional International capabilities  71
9.2.1.  Ex amples of international organisation capabilities (non exhaustive)  71
9.2.2.  Ex amples of international academic capabilities (non exhaustive)  72
10. Acknowledgements 74
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology4
This report covers work conducted by KTN 
and sponsored by Innovate UK to explore the 
innovation opportunities for UK catalysis. It incorporates the findings and recommendations of the Innovate UK/KTN sponsored UK Catalysis Special Interest Group (SIG) and an independent Catalysis Market Study.  
This report was completed prior to the coronavirus pandemic but as 
the UK and the world looks towards a green economic recovery it is thought that the trends discussed in this report can be accelerated.
Catalysis is a critical key enabler requiring investment in innovation. 
Advances in catalytic technology have a direct impact on the productivity of a significant number of chemical processes, often enabling the production of completely new products and materials for use in downstream manufacturing sectors. This enabling role of catalysis will impact multiple industries and supports the need for a cross-sector collaborative approach in order to accelerate and commercialise innovation. For innovation to be successful a systems approach is critical, including establishing strong collaborative relationships along relevant supply chains with life cycle and techno-economic analysis being essential to evaluate the impact of new capabilities. To drive and de-risk this activity, public funding will be needed alongside private investment to accelerate catalysis innovation through: 
•providing access to catalysis centres of excellence;
•the expansion of capabilities available (existing or new) in catalysis
centres of excellence;
•catalysis funding to support grand challenges and net zero;
•clean growth demonstrator projects.
The development of a catalyst is a complex and lengthy process and within the UK there are a few large manufacturers that cover the design of a catalyst through to production. A number of small companies are also involved in the manufacture of catalysts but beyond the internal capabilities of the large catalyst manufacturers, the UK has limited accessible capability to support the development, scale-up and integrated process design of catalytic technologies. A notable exception to this exists in the area of industrial biotechnology. However, the UK does have a strong academic catalysis research base focusing on lab-scale design, synthesis and testing of catalysts. 1.Executive summary
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology5

UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology6
UK industry does engage with thi s research base but 
with the strong focus on fundamental science coupl ed 
with the drivers  to publish work, the researc h can often 
be too early stag e to be immedi ately industrially  relevant 
or commercially  viable. As a result there is the need 
for more effective  engagement and capability to drive 
industry-focused  and commercially  viable projects 
around catalyst design, synthes is and testing that  
compliments the high quality fundamental research. 
Furthermore, to fill the gap in UK  capability there is a 
need for open access pilot and d emonstration-scal e 
facilities for the up-scaling and integrated catalytic 
process design for whole process systems.
The UK has a relatively small but very signifi cant 
domestic market for catalyst consumption within large 
and small organisations. Building on the UK’s expertise 
in catalysis, there is a huge potential for stimulating 
growth in existing and emerging domestic markets, 
such as hydrogen, while also generating income 
growth from the export and licensing of catalysts 
and catalytic technologies. A recent Market Study 
commissioned by Innovate UK and KTN estimates 
that in 2019, the global catalyst industry was worth 
$34.1bn and is estimated to grow at 4.3% CAGR per 
annum between 2019 and 2025, driving progress 
and innovation that delivers over $15tn in revenue 
for other downstream sectors. The UK domestic 
1 Lynch, M. 2020. UK Catalysis Market Summary. Enabled Future Limited.catalyst consumption was estimated to be $433m and 
forecasted to grow at 2.99% CAGR across the same time period. This domestic consumption of catalyst drives an estimated $188bn in revenue for downstream sectors in the areas of:
•en vironmental (including  automotive, batteries, clean
air and water);
•refining;
•p etrochemical/commodity chemicals;
•fi ne chemicals (including pharmaceuticals);
•p lastics and polymers.
Additionally, in 2019 the UK produced nearly $1bn of catalysts covering some of the domestic consumption and the remaining being for export. Further revenue will be provided from the licensing of catalytic processes and technologies.
1
Through the market study and consultation with industry, academia and other key stakeholders strategic areas for UK growth in catalysis have been identified as:
•c atalyst and process design;
•lo w carbon hydrogen;
•c arbon Capture Utilisation and Storage (CCUS);
•w aste (including biomass and polymers) to
chemicals;
•environmental;
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology7
•fi ne chemicals (including pharmaceuticals);
•n ew high functionality polymers and rubbers;
•c arbon efficiency, which includes coal-to-chemicals
(CTC), gas-to-chemicals (GTC) and crude oil-to-
chemicals (COTC).
Catalysis will be critical in supporting the move to net zero carbon emissions and enabling the UK’s energy intensive chemicals sector to decarbonise. Innovation for catalysis and integrated process design in the clean growth areas of vital importance to the UK are:
•lo w carbon hydrogen;
•c arbon capture and utilisation (CCU) to chemicals;
•w aste to chemicals.
Other areas for clean growth opportunities in the UK also exist around advancing the use of catalysis for clean air and water.
A current area of strength for the UK is pharmaceuticals 
and new catalyst technologies can provide solutions to increase the productivity of pharmaceutical manufacturing by:
•m inimising the amount of product work-up;
•a ccelerating the production of personalised medicines
in small scale distributed and continuous/pseudo-continuous manufacturing.The pharmaceutical industry can also drive changes in 
•t he use of non-precious group metal chemistries;
•t he use of new techniques around hybrid catalysis;
•t he adoption of newer approaches to catalyst
development, for example, high throughputexperimentation and predictive modelling.
There are also additional opportunities to encourage pre-competitive collaborations within the pharmaceutical industry alongside the related agrichemicals, flavours and fragrances sectors. 
Along with the investment and opportunities outlined 
above, advances in catalysis capabilities will also need to be supported by changes to policy and regulations within the relevant manufacturing sectors to drive adoption.  All these factors together should help to shape public perception to ensure that wider society supports the investment outlined above.
Catalysts and the associated technologies are used 
somewhere within the majority of chemical production pathways and with respect to net zero, without catalysts it will be impossible to achieve. 
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology82.1. Report background
Catalysis has been an ongoing focus area for research and development within the chemical-using industries due to its potential to improve the productivity of manufacturing processes while enabling new smart chemistries and products to be developed. This report details the outcomes of a body of work that has been investigating the opportunities for accelerating innovation in UK catalysis and has been engaging in cross-sector activities covering bulk chemicals, fine/speciality chemicals, pharmaceuticals, energy, oil and gas, agrichemicals, materials and water. The work was conducted by KTN and sponsored by Innovate UK and incorporates the outputs of the Innovate UK/KTN sponsored UK Catalysis Special Interest Group (SIG) and an independent Catalysis Market Study. 
2.2. Why catalysis? Why now?
Within a rapidly changing global picture there is a need for sustainable chemistries to be developed to respond to environmental challenges and the impacts of an increasing and ageing population. Catalysis is a key underpinning and enabling technology (Figure 1) that can significantly impact the productivity of manufacturing processes and enable access to new chemistries and products.  Innovation and advances in this core technology, as highlighted in the Chemistry Council’s strategy are needed to address challenges in
2: 
•clean growth;
•healthy ageing;
•future of mobility.
Within these challenge areas catalysis will be a critical enabler in the shift towards the 2050 net zero target, allowing reduced energy consumptions, increased process efficiency and enabling better use of alternative feedstocks, such as utilising CO
2, leading to more 
sustainable products and processes. As an enabling technology catalysis should not be considered in isolation, but as part of a larger system to ensure optimal and commercially viable solutions are generated that add significant value to the UK economy. 
Industrial 
DecarbonisationPlastics
Depolymerisation
Hydrogen
Catalysis
CCU
CCS
Figure 1: Catalysis is an underpinning and enabling technology2.Introduction
Carbon Capture 
& Utilisation (CCU)
Carbon Capture 
& Storage (CCS)
2. Chemistry Council. 2018. "Sustainable Innovation for  a better world. " Chemistry Council. Nov. 
https://ukchemi strygrowth.com/ wp-content/uploa ds/2019/02/ Chemistry-Coun cil_v17_lr.pd f
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology9However, catalysts are complex materials requiring 
a combination of multidisciplinary science and engineering to design, manufacture and commercially scale. Catalysts need to be characterised and tested to produce a commercially viable, robust and functional structure that can operate at full scale and withstand real world process conditions. To produce a commercially viable catalyst it needs to be designed as part of the entire production system with a defined feedstock and end product. Hence it is important to develop a solution that solves the right problem at the right time utilising a systems approach that would include:
•c omplete supply chains;
•l ifecycle analysis;
•t echno-economic analysis;
•en vironmental assessment;
•r eaction engineering and process design covering
unit operations, single/multiple processes and massand energy balances.organisations now need to rely on outsourcing and collaborative approaches to develop underpinning and enabling technologies. 
For these reasons there is now a need to have a 
collaborative research and development programme in catalysis which will bring together stakeholders across all disciplines throughout the supply chain. The opportunity is for the UK to create cheaper, cleaner, more efficient and effective processes, this will require de-risking faster discovery, screening and development of commercially viable catalysts and enabling quicker routes to market.
2.3. Catalysis and the UK’s national strategy
The UK’s current industrial strategy is centred around the four grand challenges of
3:
•Cl ean growth
M aximising the advantages for UK industry from the
global shift to clean growth.
•A geing society
H arnessing the power of innovation to help meet the
needs of an ageing society.
•F uture of mobility
B ecoming a world leader in shaping the future of
mobility.
•A I and data economy
Pu tting the UK at the forefront of the artificial
intelligence and data revolution.
In parallel to the Industrial Strategy there are also the specific complementary government strategies: 25 Year Environment Plan
4,  Clean Growth Strategy5 and 
Clean Air Strategy6. Key features of the Clean Growth 
Strategy are the drive for industrial decarbonisation in the UK and the need to increase the use of low carbon technologies. Since the publication of the Clean Growth Strategy the target for reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 80% has been replaced by 
the net zero GHG target by 2050. Catalysis will be an 
enabling technology for Clean Growth, Healthy Ageing For companies developing end-to-end processes it is 
not always clear what role catalysis can play, and for 
those without catalysis expertise they can struggle 
to access UK capability in a timely and appropriate 
manner, for example, short feasibility studies with quick 
turnaround times.
Historically the UK chemical industry consisted of a 
number of large organisations with significant in-house 
research and development expertise and capability for 
developing commercial scale catalysts. Today the UK 
has fewer large organisations with this in-house 
capability and a larger number of SMEs who may 
not have a wide-ranging breadth of capability. With 
recent advances in catalyst measurement, catalyst 
characterisation, high throughput experimentation and 
predictive modelling, understanding how best to utilise 
and leverage methods and equipment is challenging. 
This is especially true when technologies and expertise 
is then housed across different organisations. As such 
3 (Department for  Business, Ene rgy & Industria l Strategy 2017)
4 https://www .gov.uk/government/publication s/25-year-env ironment-plan  
5 https://www .gov.uk/government/publication s/clean-growth -strategy
6 https://www .gov.uk/government/publication s/clean-air -strategy-2019
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology10and the Future of Mobility. For healthy ageing, two 
reports that have fed into the strategy are Healthy ageing innovation and investment in the UK
7 and 
Developing the industrial strategy challenge fund healthy ageing: a technologically enabled ecosystem for healthy ageing
8, in addition, there is also the Life 
sciences: industrial strategy9 report which outlines the 
need for growth in medicines manufacturing base in the UK.
Catalysis and clean growth 
A 2013 report by Dechema estimates that in 2050, catalytic and related processes could globally enable 1Gt CO
2e/yr savings and a reduction of 20-40% in 
energy requirements when compared with a 2050 business-as-usual scenario based on the manufacture of the top eighteen largest volume chemicals
10.  Novel 
catalyst technology will provide improved routes for the manufacture of low carbon hydrogen and utilising ‘waste carbon’ in its various forms, from carbon dioxide to plastic waste and converting it to higher value chemicals and materials. Catalysis innovation will lead to significant step changes in manufacturing that will be essential to reach the ambitious 2050 net zero, industrial decarbonisation and energy efficiency targets set by the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS)
11.  
Catalysis and healthy ageing With an ageing population, chemo and biocatalysis has a role in the manufacturing of medicines. Catalysis could allow for new chemistries to be developed that produce fewer impurities and by-products whilst 
minimising product work-up and delivering economic 
value. For small molecules, catalysis will support the move towards smaller scale, agile and continuous/pseudo-continuous manufacturing for the production of personalised medicines. 
Figure 2: Market opportunities for catalysis
7 https://www.ageing-better.org.uk/publications/industrial-strategy-challenge-fund-iscf-healthy-ageing-innovation-and-investment-uk
8 https://www.ageing.ox.ac.uk/publications/view/653
9 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/life-sciences-industrial-strategy
10 I EA & Dechema. 2013. Technology Roadmap: Energy and GHG reductions in the chemical industry via catalytic processes. France: IEA Publications.
11 D epartment for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy. 2017. “Industrial decarbonisation and energy efficiency action plans.” GOV.UK. Oct 12. Accessed May 29,  
2 020. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/industrial-decarbonisation-and-energy-efficiency-action-plans.Clean growth Ageing society Future of mobility
Decarbonisation/Defossilisation
Renewables Waste
H2 CO2 to Cn
Reducing environmental pollution
Ethical supply and use of catalysts and materialsWater Clean air TextilesAdvanced materials
Advanced materials
Advanced materialsPharmaceutical manufacture
Catalytic sensors (point of care)
Food preservationAdvances in catalytic 
battery technology
Carbon efficient  
fuel supply
Critical raw materials Lower toxicity Circular economy
Artificial intelligence and data: digitisation, AI & ML
Net Zero
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology11Catalysis and the future of mobility
As part of the future of mobility challenge there have been investments in innovation that supports clean methods of powering vehicles. This has included electric and other ultra-low emission vehicles along with the associated infrastructure. Novel catalysts will enable the next  generation of batteries and fuel cells to function. Advanced catalysts can provide new cathodes with improved electrochemical performance producing faster charging batteries with greater  capacities along with increased discharge voltages and rates. 
2.3.1. New catalyst development and the  
UK Grand Challenges
Figure 2 shows where UK industry and academia 
have identified market opportunities for catalysis that support the UK grand challenges and the shift towards net zero while also having the potential to generate value for the UK economy. This value will be created through the manufacture of the catalysts, the consumption of catalysts during manufacturing of products and through the licensing of catalyst technologies.
To leverage these opportunities, industry will need 
to introduce substantial changes to existing and new processes utilising advances in all areas of catalysis, such as bio, chemo, electro and photocatalysis. However, a limiting factor in the translation of research has been the direct applicability of academic outputs to real world conditions and applications. This is in part due to there being limited capability in the UK to support the translation and scale-up of commercially viable research. The current speed of new catalyst development to overcome challenges is driving end users to look for solutions which are either commercialised or are very close to commercialisation and so there is limited horizon scanning for new innovations.
Across all the market opportunities there is a need to 
develop methods and capabilities that allow for the de-risking of technologies and enable faster scale-up of catalysts and associated processes.  
To improve the uptake of new catalytic innovation industry faces challenges in:
•U nderstanding the market opportunities fromfeedstock to product and the role of innovation.
•G aining access to credible yet impartial commercial
and technical know-how relating to catalystdevelopment and application of new catalysistechnologies for industrial manufacture.
•H aving the ability to quickly scale-up and produce
robust reliable data to enable the engineering andtranslation of research whilst also be able to learnquickly from any failures.
•U nderstanding when the different types of catalysis
would be best applied.
These challenges reinforce the importance of techno-economic evaluations and whole system 
design when translating innovative research towards 
a commercial solution, something which can be overlooked in early and late stage research. This includes the need to have integrated thinking on the most advantageous, robust, economical and innovative catalysis solutions that can be scaled-up for real-world applications. As an underpinning capability, catalysts are only one vital part of an entire system, therefore, to develop and adopt new catalysts it requires a multidisciplinary, cross-sector approach enabling a holistic view of the entire supply chain and the existing capabilities. Any new approaches have to factor in its adoption when considering the existing assets and infrastructure within the supply chain. Catalyst design and development needs to balance specificity with conversion and yields. Paul Weisz’s ‘Window of Reality’ is a quantitative rule of thumb around the commercial viability of a catalytic process based upon achieving a desired conversion of feedstock to products within practical limits
12. 
During scale-up this factor takes into consideration the rates of mass and heat transfer as well as the manufacturing times and the scale of equipment. Within given processes there are also common 
requirements for catalysts to be designed towards 
optimal temperatures, balancing process energy and heat recovery requirements, whilst also extending the catalyst life-cycle (in-use, regeneration, reuse/recycling) and when required ensuring they are easily separated from products (e.g. active ingredients from biocatalysts). 
12 D erouane E.G. et al. 2000. Combinatorial Catalysis and High Throughput Catalyst Design and Testing. Springer-Science+Business Media, B.V.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology12
3.1. Market overview 
On behalf of Innovate UK and KTN, a full UK 
Catalysis Market Study was conducted by Enabled Future Ltd. An associated UK Catalysis Market summary report has been made publicly available
13. 
(UK Catalysis Market Summary, 2020, Enabled Future Ltd). This report was completed prior to the coronavirus pandemic; as the UK and the world looks towards a green economic recovery, it is thought that some of the trends discussed in this report could be accelerated.
The global catalyst industry is worth $34.1bn 
and drives progress and innovation across other industries delivering over $15tn in revenue, which when including the licensing of catalytic technology increases the estimate to $16tn.  Figure 3 shows the breakdown of the global catalyst market by application, and Figure 4 shows the expected revenue growth per application area up until 2025. This is a market that is growing faster than GDP at a CAGR of 4.3% per annum. Refined products are expected to continue to grow due to demand of transport fuel coupled together with tighter emission regulations. Catalysis demand for refineries will shift as the main focus moves towards the production of chemicals. While catalysts will be required to cope with the diversification of vehicle powertrains towards other technologies, for example, fuels cells and plug-in hybrids. There will also be a need for catalysts to produce low carbon hydrogen.
143.Global and domestic
catalysis market
13 Lynch M, UK Catalysis Market Summary, 2020, Enabled Future Limited.
14 Lynch M, UK Catalysis Market Summary, 2020, Enabled Future Limited.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology13

UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology14
Figure 4
Expected catalyst market growth 2019 – 2025 
(pre Covid-19 estimates)
15 ( Lynch 2020)
16 (Lynch 2020)6.85, 20%
4.45, 13%12.67, 37%Figure 3Global catalyst revenue by market application 2019, $ bn
15
2.05, 6%
Petrochemical Fine chemical Polymerisation
Environmental8.11, 20%
Refining
Fine chemical
CARG=8.1%Polymerisation
CARG=4.1%Refining
CARG=3.1%
Petrochemical
CARG=4.4%Environmental
CARG=4.8%
Figure 6
UK catalyst market revenue, 2019-2025 (excluding exports), $mn (pre Covid-19 estimates)
5,944: 17%
2,367: 7%13,153: 39%Figure 5
Catalyst revenue by geography 2019, $mn16
9,816: 29%
UK France Germany
China696: 2%
USA
Fine chemical
CARG=5.6%Polymerisation
CARG=0.3%Refining
CARG=1.1%
Petrochemical
CARG=2.5%Environmental
CARG=4.5%CARG=4.5% (N.B. CARG from 2019-2025=4.3%)
1,720: 5%433: 1%
UK catalyst market $433m
(domestic and imported)
Japan Rest of the WorldCARG=2.99%
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology15Globally, the total chemical market revenue is set to 
reach $3.9tn in 2020 and China has the largest market 
at $1.4tn. The global chemical market has a forecasted 
CAGR of 3.8% per annum and will reach $6.8tn by 
2035. As a sector, the fine chemicals market, which 
includes agrochemicals, consumer chemicals and 
pharmaceuticals, is growing the fastest with a CAGR of 
9.3% per annum up until 2025. Polymerisation catalysts 
are projected to grow at a CAGR of 3.9% per annum 
helping to deliver the increasing demand for new 
polymers with higher functionality and those which are 
chemically recycled.16
In the UK for 2018 the manufacture of chemicals and 
pharmaceuticals generated £18bn GVA and had a 
total turnover of £48.5bn, whilst the manufacture of fuels 
produced £2.6bn GVA and £27bn turnover17. 
The chemical markets, which include petrochemical, 
fine chemicals and polymerisation rely mainly on 
heterogeneous catalysts, with a smaller amount being 
homogeneous and biocatalysis predominately in the 
fine chemical sector. This will continue to be the case for 
the foreseeable future, however innovation in all forms 
of catalysis will be needed. With the market trends and 
the expected growth of both the chemicals and catalysis 
markets there is a significant opportunity for the UK 
to exploit. Catalysis being a key enabling technology 
which is used in an estimated 80-90% of chemical 
processes has a significant role to play in exploiting these 
opportunities18, 19, 20. A comparison of the UK’s catalyst revenue with five 
other countries, China, France, Germany, Japan and 
USA is shown in Figure 5, with these six countries 
being collectively 61.5% of the total catalyst market. 
Even though within the countries studied, the UK has 
the lowest catalyst demand, it is still of significant value 
with an estimated $433m of direct consumption which 
is forecasted to increase at CAGR of 2.99% between 
2019 and 2025 reaching $5 17m (see Figure 6). The UK’s 
$433m of direct consumption also drives the delivery of 
an estimated $188bn of domestic revenue and Figure 
7 shows a breakdown by market of the UK’s domestic 
catalyst consumption and the associated additional 
industry revenue generated. Furthermore, the total 
value of catalysts produced and sold by the UK in 2019, 
including for domestic use and for export, was worth 
$944m (see Figure 8) which was 2.9% of the total global 
market revenue, with the licensing of catalytic processes 
and technologies providing additional revenue. In 
the UK Johnson Matthey develops and manufactures 
catalysts and INEOS produces catalysts to meet internal 
production requirements whilst also licenses some 
technologies. There are a few other large organisations 
developing and manufacturing catalysts as well as a 
number of small companies operating in the UK in the 
area of fine chemicals and polymerisation. So even with 
the UK having a relatively small domestic market, given 
its expertise in catalysis, there is huge potential for 
stimulating growth in existing and emerging domestic 
markets, such as hydrogen, as well as income growth 
from exporting and licensing of catalysts and catalytic 
technologies.21 
17  Office for National Statistics. 2020. “Office for National Statistics.” Non-financial business economy, UK: Sections A to S. May 15. Accessed May 29, 2020. 
https://www.ons.gov.uk/b usinessindustryandtra de/business/businessser vices/ datasets/uknonfinanc ialbusinesseconomyannualb usinesssurveysectionsas.  
18  Barroso, M, J H Bitter, B Broxterman, B de Bruin, F R van Buren, U Hanefeld, E J.M Hensen, et al. 2015. Catalysis - Key to a Sustainable Future: Science and 
Technology Roadmap for Catalysis in the Netherlands. The Dutch Minsitry of Economic Affairs, The Netherlands Institute for Catalysis Research (NIOK), The 
Industrial Advisory Board of NIOK (VIRAN), The Hague: Zalsman B.V.
19  Catlow, C, M Davidson, C Hardacre, and G Hutchings. 2016. “Philisophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Catalysis Making the World a Better Place.” The 
Royal Society  Publishing. P hil. Trans. R. Soc. A 374:20150089. Jan 11. http://rsta.roya lsocietypubl ishing.org/c ontent/374/2061/ 20150089.
20  Chorkendorff, I., and J. W. Niemantsverdriet. 2007. Concepts of Modern Catalysis and Kinetics. Weinheim: Wiley-VCH Verlag GmBH & Co. KGaA.  
21  (Lynch 2020)
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology16
Figure 7: UK domestic catalyst consumption and associated industry revenue 2019
The results of a catalyst intellectual property analysis conducted on the six countries are summarised in Table 1. 
The UK has the lowest number of patents out of the six countries. At 6 1%, it has a moderate level of granted patents 
and a high global reach ratio of 11:1 when compared with the number of patent families. The global reach provides 
an indication that British assignees consider catalyst innovations are worth protecting in other countries. Similarly 
when looking at clean growth and healthcare there are again moderate levels of patent grants at 66% for both areas 
and Table 2 shows the key topics for patents for each country. Across all patents the UK has a strong focus on UK 
catalyst preparation, exhaust gases and fine chemicals. In the area of clean growth; fuels cells, membrane electrode 
assemblies, Fischer- Tropsch, CO2 and syngas are shown as top areas. Although CO2 and syngas can be seen to be an 
area of focus for all the countries included in the study, clean growth is still an emerging area for the UK which can be 
seen from the number of businesses and projects being started in this area. For fine chemicals the key topics for the 
UK are focused on therapeutics as opposed to personal care, cosmetics or food production. This is refl ective of the 
strong pharmaceutical presence in the UK and the number of CROs (contract research organisations) and CDMOs 
(contract development and manufacturing organisations) present.22
Figure 8: UK catalyst market, 201923
23 (Lynch 2020)UK catalyst  
market $433mCommodity chemicals
$94m enables $26bn
Fine chemicals$18m enables $12bn
Refining$100m enables $42bnEnvironmental*
$181m enables $84bnPlastics and polymers
$40m enables $5bn
Pharmaceuticals^$20bn
* Based on automotive industry data   ^ Not fully reflected in the catalyst figure
$1,200
$1,000
$800$600$400$200
0
Consumption Import Export Total$433 $(359)$920 $994
22 (Lynch 2020)
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology17Patent set Great Britain France Germany USA China Japan
Families ‘000s ‘000s ‘000s ‘000s ‘000s ‘000s
All patents 
Families 8.1 11.1 30.0 47.9 227.1 47.5
Grants 4.9 61% 9.2 83% 18.0 60% 30.5 64% 97.8 43% 26.1 55%
GR 11.1 9.1 7.3 8.1 1.2 7.1
Clean growth 
Families 1.0 1.4 2.9 7.8 12.0 7.6
Grants 0.7 66% 1.2 88% 1.8 63% 387.7 72% 5.2 44% 4.6 60%
Healthcare Families 1.9
2.0 3.9 8.3 10.7 4.3
Grants 1.3 66% 1.7 86% 2.7 68% 5.3 64% 3.5 32% 1.6 37%Table 1: IP Comparison by country including clean growth and healthcare subsets24
24 ( Lynch 2020)
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology18Key Topics
All patents Clean growth Fine chemicals
UKCat Prep
Exhaust Gas
Fine ChemCO2, Syngas,  
Fischer-Tropsch
MEA, Fuel CellsHeterocycles
Protein Kinase Disorders
Microcapsules
FranceExhaust Gas
Cat Prep & Colloids
Personal CareCO2, Syngas
Pyrolysis Oil
Catalyst Prep
 Catalyst Features
Acrylic Acid - Absorbent
Deodorising catalysts
GermanyExhaust Gas
Cat Prep & Colloids
PolymersCO2, Syngas
LC Biomass
Process EfficiencyPersonal Care
Cosmetics & Toiletries
Detergents
Superabsorbents
Protein Kinase
USACatalysts, sorbents,  
FBR catalysts
Nanotechnology
Exhaust Gas CO2, Syngas
Transportation Fuel, LC 
Biomass
Bio-OilPersonal Care
Protein Kinase
Anti-Cancer Drugs
China Air & Water Purification
Catalyst Preparation
Specialty materialsCO2, Syngas
Catalyst Prep
Water splitting Food preservatives
Animal feed
Antimicrobials
Soybean products
JapanExhaust Gas
Fuel Cells
Catalyst Preparation CO2, Syngas
LC Biomass
Metal RecyclingPersonal Care
AA/SAP
CO2 AbsorbentsTable 2: Key topics comparison by country25
25 (Lynch 2020)
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology193.2. UK market opportunities
Table 3 provides more detail on the market opportunities for the UK in the areas of clean growth and healthcare, 
highlighting the UK’s current position and future opportunities26.
Theme  UK Position Opportunity
Carbon efficiencyWell developed position on fossil fuels 
to petrochemicals. Novel concepts on 
reforming. Investigate integration with UK refineries. 
Exploit novel reformers for natural gas 
carbon efficiency.
HydrogenElectrolysis technology available. Novel 
reformers in development. World class 
conventional technology. Fuel cell 
catalysis.Support electrolysers, look at other 
low-carbon opportunities e.g. methane 
pyrolysis and reforming with CCS.
CO2 CaptureVery little technology for CO 2 capture 
at large scale. First UK project now 
underway.Small-scale capture to facilitate CO 2U. 
Need to develop or acquire technology for 
CO2 sorbents. Possi-ble DAC plant.
CO2 UtilisationSMEs with technology in a couple of 
applications. Likely more technologies 
which could be nurtured.Identify and support further UK 
technologies.
PolymerisationINEOS is strong on polyolefins; JM has 
limited coverage. SMEs with successful 
innovations. Catalysts for functional materials and 
novel materials. Look at the green 
innovations for converting waste food and 
other waste streams.
RenewablesJM technology for platform biobased 
chemicals.HVO for UK refineries; combine with 
biocatalysis for bulk specialties.
Fine ChemicalsStrong IP position on small molecules. 
Large number of CRO/CMO providing and 
exporting technology.Identify and exploit CROs with catalyst 
expertise.
Water Treatment Not strong on innovative water treatment.Identify and support SMEs working in this 
area in the UK.
Catalyst FormulationsNew developments on polymer catalysts, 
structured reforming catalysts, interest in 
3D printing designs.Look at more opportunities, for example, 
use of 3D modelling/printing.Table 3: UK market opportunities for clean growth and healthcare27
Based on consultation with industry and academia then combined with the UK Catalysis Market Study, Figure 9 
shows the main innovation areas where catalysis can enable the UK to grow domestically and lead internationally.
26 (Lynch 2020)
27 (Lynch 2020)
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology20
Figure 9: Areas for UK to grow domestically & to lead globally
The UK has a smaller catalyst market when compared to other countries however it will be still greater than $500m 
by 2025 and will continue to drive benefits in downstream sectors. Through this and the licensing of technology, 
catalysis will deliver significant value to the UK economy. As such the UK should aim to leverage increasing domestic 
demand in new and growing UK markets, for example, in the areas related to clean growth and fine chemicals, which 
will demand the need for new catalysts. In the area of clean growth the UK needs to deliver on more sustainable 
manufacturing and to reach net zero by 2050 it will require a large amount of innovation leveraging current know how 
and capability. Fine chemicals is the fastest growing market area, largely due to pharmaceuticals, where catalysis 
technology plays a key role. Both areas will benefit from being underpinned by new and faster catalyst design, 
upscaling and process design.Virgin 
bio-based 
feedstocks to 
chemicals
Environment
Automotive catalysts, 
fuel cells, air and 
water treatmentCCUS to chemicals
Carbon capture 
utilisation and 
storageNew high 
functionality 
Polymer & Rubber
High functionality, 
new materialsCarbon Efficiency
Crude oil to chemicals 
(COTC), coal to 
chemicals (CTC),  
gas to chemicals  
(GTC)
Fine Chemicals
Agrichemicals, flavours 
and fragrances, 
pharmaceuticalsLow Carbon 
Hydrogen
Green and 
blue H 2
Waste (inc 
biomass & 
polymers) to 
ChemicalsAll  Catalyst &  
Process Design
General, structured 
catalysts, catalyst 
reactor design13
4
56 789 2
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology21

UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology22
For all types of catalysis, hetero, homo, bio, photo and 
electro catalysis, advances in design, discovery and 
formulation are crucial for providing step changes 
in activity, increasing operational performance and 
giving access to new chemical pathways. Enhancing 
capabilities to design and scale-up catalysts will provide 
faster development cycles, quicker routes to market 
and processes with increased productivity. Access 
to advanced technologies such as high throughput 
experimentation coupled with predictive modelling at 
all stages of development can speed up product and 
process development.
However, from catalyst design and discovery through 
to commercialisation (see Figure 10), it is important to 
design, scale and test new catalysts while considering 
the techno-economics and the industry application 
along with the allowable processing conditions. For 
a commercially viable process, the catalyst design 
and development needs to balance specificity with 
conversion and yields which are factors of process 
plant design, for example, high selectivity may produce a by-product or impurity that makes separation and 
purification of a product harder and more costly. 
Hence, during the upscaling of the catalyst it becomes 
more important to factor in the process and reaction 
engineering associated with full-scale production. 
Catalysts need to be designed to operate at optimal 
temperatures based on the energy efficiencies and 
heat recovery requirements of the scaled process. 
The catalyst form/medium at full scale needs to be 
proven to be robust structurally and kinetically with 
acceptable rates of mass and heat transfer. In addition, 
a key consideration should be how impurities from the 
feedstock and by-products produced from the reaction 
impact the performance of catalyst. Other factors 
that need to be understood during scale-up relating 
to the catalyst lifecycle are methods for regeneration, 
separation (if applicable), re-use and recycling.
An example of the importance of catalyst design and its 
impact on production is the UK innovations of Johnson 
Matthey and the CatacelSSR structured steam reforming 
catalyst28. Murkin C et al  describe the modifications 4. Integrated catalyst and process design for  
industrial application and faster adoption
Figure 10: From new catalyst design to development
28 Murkin , C, and J Brightling. 2016. “Eighty Years of Steam Reforming.” Johnson Matthey Technology Review (Johnson Matthey) 60 (4): 263-269.Catalyst 
Design
Catalyst design, synthesis 
and characterisation
Biocatalyst discovery, 
screening and expressionCatalyst process 
design and 
integrationCatalyst 
Design
Catalyst Upscaling, incl. catalyst 
forming and characterisation
Biocatalyst process development 
and scale-up
Reactor and process design
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology23over time of the steam methane reformer (SMR) and 
the catalyst used. The design of the reformer and the process has enabled improved efficiencies relating to heat integration, tube metallurgy and the actual number of tubes used. Whilst the changes to the catalyst shape and form, as seen in Figure 11, has provided higher productivity by increasing the voidage, reducing the pressure drop and increasing the space velocity. These improvements have been enabled with the improved mechanical integrity of the catalyst and its support. Supporting technologies such as predictive modelling has allowed for the improved design of the catalyst and reactor.
Another example of the importance of catalyst design 
and its industrial application is the BP/JM CANS™ modular catalyst and associated containers that offer a step-change in performance for Fischer-Tropsch reactions.
30,31Both BP and JM had been working on 
Fischer-Tropsch technology since the 1980s and formed a collaboration and partnership in 1996. In 2018 the innovative waste-to-fuels Fischer-Tropsch technology including the novel reactor and catalyst utilising BP/JM CANS™ technology was licensed to Fulcrum Bioenergy for the first commercial USA plant to be built to manufacture aviation fuel from municipal solid waste.
32 Not only does this example show the importance of catalyst and reactor design it also highlights the benefits of collaboration. 
These two examples show the timescales that can be 
involved in the design and development of catalysts, reactors and processes. Therefore there is a significant opportunity to accelerate industry-led innovation in the scale-up of integrated catalyst and process design in order to reduce the time to market and achieve commercial success. Technologies such as high throughput experimentation and predictive modelling have a role to play; however, of particular importance is the requirement for collaborative approaches that remain focussed on the scale-up of catalysts together with the industrial processes and application.
The UK has strong skills in the design of advanced 
catalytic materials which should be leveraged further to accelerate development and scale-up of the better processes. To do this the UK needs to also focus on the scale-up of catalyst along with the reaction and process design. This will ensure the design of optimised catalysts and  processes which are needed to deliver the requirements of future opportunities. Figure 11: Changes to SMR catalyst shape over time29  ©Johnson Matthey Plc
29  M urkin, C, and J Brightling. 2016. “Eighty Years of Steam Reforming.” Johnson Matthey Technology Review (Johnson Matthey) 60 (4): 263-269. Copyright Johnson 
Matthey Plc, Image adapted and reproduced with permission from Johnson Matthey Plc.
30  J ohnson Matthey. n.d. CANS novel reactors technology. Accessed May 2020. https://matthey.com/en/products-and-services/chemical-processes/core-
technologies/cans-novel-reactors.
31  J ohnson Matthey. n.d. CANS novel reactors technology. Accessed May 2020. https://matthey.com/en/products-and-services/chemical-processes/core-
technologies/cans-novel-reactors.
32  J ohnson Matthey. 2018. JM and BP license waste-to-fuels technology to Fulcrum BioEnergy. Sept. https://matthey.com/news/2018/jm-and-bp-license-waste-to-
fuels-technology-to-fulcrum-bioenergy.1930 2014Changes to SMR catalyst shape over time
Cube Cylindrical 
pelletsCylindrical 
pelletsCylindrical 
pelletsCylindrical 
foil supported 
structureCross 
sectionSquare Ring 4-hole Quadralobe™ CATACELJMSSR™
Form  
Productivity change over time
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology24
5.1. Clean Growth Introduction
The UK Government’s Industrial Strategy lays out clean 
growth as one of the Grand Challenges. As the world 
shifts towards cleaner greener technologies there is 
an opportunity for the UK to lead the world in clean 
growth technologies, through the development of low 
carbon technologies, systems and services that are 
more economical than traditional offerings. Identified 
as the next industrial revolution the green transition 
could significantly grow the UK economy with current 
industries transformed and new ones created. The 
UK was the first major economy in the world to lay out 
plans to reach net zero by 2050, this provides different 
industries with a clear target in the move to reduce 
carbon emissions and highlights the commitment by the 
UK Government to the area of clean growth.In order to achieve the net zero targets there will need 
to be new technology developments and large scale 
deployment of existing technologies across multiple 
sectors. One of the critical steps on the journey to net 
zero will be the availability of renewable energy, which 
will be required for industrial processes to reach net 
zero. There are a range of other technologies including 
carbon capture and storage, hydrogen and the use of 
non-petrochemical feedstocks that will need to be used 
in combination to achieve net zero. The image below 
(Figure 12) shows the vision of the South Wales Industrial 
Cluster where multiple technologies are utilised across 
the region. Catalysis can play a role in many of these 
technologies. 5. Clean growth
Figure 12: South Wales Industrial Cluster33
33 SWIC (South Wales Industrial Cluster). 2020. Image reproduced with permission from SWIC. Accessed May 29, 2020. swic.cymru.

UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology25The UK has capability in the 
development of hydrogen from 
methane processes and, alongside 
deployment activities through the 
ISCF Industrial Decarbonisation of 
Clusters Challenges, this is deemed 
a key UK strength. 
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology26
The development of sustainable fuels and chemicals 
will be an important factor in reducing emissions 
across different sectors, for example transport. The 
development of sustainable fuels and chemicals will 
be reliant on several different factors including market 
conditions, availability of feedstocks, required volume, 
cost, policy and incentives. For catalysis development 
in this area there are several priorities within two key 
themes, alternative feedstocks and energy. These will 
be covered in detail in later sections, however, there are 
underpinning technology requirements and challenges 
which also need to be considered. 
Traditional homo- and hetero-geneous catalysts will 
continue to play a significant role, however there is an 
opportunity to access different reactions and routes by 
employing different approaches through the adoption 
of electrocatalysis, photocatalysis and biocatalysis. The 
scale at which a catalyst operates at may also change, 
as plants look to become more modular and flexible 
also allowing different approaches to be considered. 
As more alternative feedstocks like biomass are utilised 
as raw materials there is also likely to be a need for the 
development of deoxygenation catalysts.  Some of the important opportunities for catalysis also 
present challenges in this area, for example the use 
of combined waste streams and the consistency of 
feedstocks. Challenges around changes in the content 
of feedstocks, materials which may poison a catalyst 
alongside the availability of renewable energy will all 
impact the design of a new process and the catalyst of 
choice. It is also of note that where possible companies 
will utilise existing assets and re-engineer these as 
required. Alongside this the rise of circular economy 
approaches means that catalysts should be recyclable or 
recoverable and this needs to be taken into account at an 
early stage of the development process. 
In addition to the net zero technology requirements 
there is a growing trend to make products in a more 
sustainable way. For example, the development of 
new processes and technologies that use fewer toxic 
materials, reduce the production of organic waste 
or increase the use of natural products. These are 
considerations that should be taken into account when 
designing new processes. 
Figure 13: Low carbon hydrogen
Low Carbon Hydrogen 
is the top area for clean 
growth in the UKBlue Hydrogen 
ProductionGreen Hydrogen 
Production
Catalysis Opportunity
Steam Methane 
Reforming (SMR), 
Sorbent, Enhanced 
Steam Reforming (ESR)Catalysis Opportunity
Electrolysers

UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology275.2. Hydrogen generation
Currently the petrochemicals industry uses catalysts in 
a wide range of applications including the production 
of hydrogen (see Figure 13) which is utilised in many 
different processes for example, refining. Hydrogen will 
play a key role in the UK’s plans to meet the net zero 
2050 targets, with the opportunity to help transport, heat, 
energy, and industrial sectors decarbonise, consequently 
the production of low carbon hydrogen will be critical. 
In addition low carbon hydrogen will be one of the key 
feedstocks for the production of chemicals and materials. 
The UK has an opportunity to capitalise on energy 
produced via offshore wind farms that could be utilised 
to produce green hydrogen. Alongside this, natural gas 
reserves allow for the production of blue hydrogen when 
production is combined with a CCS network. This is the 
basis of the vision for many large industrial clusters with 
several different projects across the UK being planned. 
For example, Pale Blue Dot Energy and Costain will 
be building the UK’s first CCS plant serving the oil and 
gas sector and the Acorn hydrogen project. It is the 
combination of blue and green hydrogen production 
deployed in appropriate sites that will enable key 
transitions towards net zero. 
5.2.1. Blue hydrogen
Blue hydrogen is the production of hydrogen from 
methane where the CO2 emissions are captured 
and stored. There are several different reforming 
technologies that have been developed for the 
production of hydrogen these include steam methane 
reforming, autothermal reforming, gas heated reforming. 
Different reforming technologies offer different benefits 
for example the fluidised autothermal reforming of 
syngas does not require an external fuel source reducing 
the associated carbon emissions. 
Current understanding suggests that the limiting 
factors in the deployment of reforming technologies are 
related to economics and process engineering. In the 
demonstration of reforming technologies there is a large 
capital expenditure requirement which is a significant 
barrier for many companies. Further catalyst and process design could improve efficiencies and decrease the 
carbon emissions associated with the process. 
Other technologies in this space include 
dehydroaromatization which uses catalysts to produce 
aromatics and hydrogen, the fermentation of methane 
where hydrogen is a by-product of protein synthesis 
and methane pyrolysis, a process which produces 
graphite and hydrogen which removes the need for 
carbon capture. These technologies tend to be at a lower 
TRL level when compared with some of the reforming 
technologies, however they do produce multiple 
products which can add value to the process and alter 
the economics.  
The UK has capability in the development of hydrogen 
from methane processes and, alongside deployment 
activities through the ISCF Industrial Decarbonisation of 
Clusters Challenges, this is deemed a key UK strength. 
Delivery of blue hydrogen plants combined with CCS 
will provide low-cost hydrogen, reduce CO 2 emissions, 
improve the UK’s global competitiveness and enable the 
decarbonisation of multiple sectors. At present there are 
still low demand signals for hydrogen but as the energy 
transition occurs and hydrogen begins to be utilised for 
transport, heat and energy the volume requirements will 
rise. 
There are however challenges associated with the 
development of blue hydrogen technologies, a particular 
barrier is the capital investment required to demonstrate 
the technology at scale. There are active projects 
beginning to address these challenges including the 
Hynet project, with £7.48m awarded to Gloucester-based 
clean-energy company Progressive Energy Limited, in 
collaboration with Johnson Matthey, SNC Lavalin and 
Essar Oil. This will fund further project development 
including the. engineering design to deliver a ‘shovel 
ready’ project which will include the development of a 
100,000 Nm 3 h-1 blue hydrogen production facility using 
Johnson Matthey’s low carbon hydrogen technology 
which enables carbon capture and storage. The 
hydrogen plant will be owned and operated by Essar 
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology28Stanlow, using refinery fuel gas (RFG) as a feedstock. 
Potential users of the hydrogen produced are identified 
in the Phase 1 report. 
Other challenges include accessing high-throughput 
testing facilities, particularly for screening catalysts 
under high temperature and high pressure conditions. 
This would enable faster evaluation of catalysts under 
close to operational conditions, shortening catalyst and 
process development times. 
In order for blue hydrogen to be one of the key 
technologies in reaching net zero it needs to be 
connected to a CCS network. In the initial stages the 
large industrial clusters are likely to be the beneficiaries 
of the CCS deployment; as such there will be a need 
for smaller clusters to develop alternative hydrogen 
technologies to reach net zero, which is where green 
hydrogen will play an important role. 
5.2.2. Green hydrogen
Green hydrogen is the production of hydrogen using 
electrolysis, it is of particular importance that the 
electricity used for this is produced from clean low-cost 
energy to take advantage of the reduced carbon footprint. 
The UK has significant strengths in green hydrogen 
production with companies producing electrolysers and 
fuel cells, for example, ITM Power and Intelligent Energy. 
There are a range of challenges both technical and 
commercial associated with green hydrogen including 
cost, scale and energy density. There are also associated 
challenges for example hydrogen storage. These 
challenges are beginning to be addressed through 
a range of funded projects. For example funding of 
£7.5m has been awarded to ITM Power Trading Ltd, in 
collaboration with Orsted, Phillips 66 and Element Energy 
for the second phase of the Gigastack project. This seeks 
to demonstrate the delivery of bulk, low-cost and zero-
carbon hydrogen through ITM Power’s gigawatt-scale 
polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) electrolysers, 
manufactured in the UK.
The project aims to dramatically reduce the cost of 
electrolytic hydrogen. The funding will enable ITM Power to work towards developing a system that uses 
electricity from Orsted’s Hornsea Two offshore wind 
farm to generate renewable hydrogen for the Phillips 66 
Humber Refinery. The company will also develop further 
plans for large scale production of electrolysers. ITM 
Power is also installing its technology internationally 
including in Germany, Canada and Australia. This is 
an example of a highly successful UK company and its 
innovations, underpinned by the ability to develop, scale 
and successfully deploy catalyst technologies.
There is a significant opportunity for the UK to build on 
current electrochemical strengths and utilise different 
types of technology, for example photocatalysis or 
biocatalysis to further develop the green hydrogen 
offering. This also provides an opportunity to produce 
hydrogen outside of the large industrial clusters, 
and as such can be developed to meet the specific 
requirements in a defined place allowing for local and 
regional differences. The need for electrolysers and other 
methods of producing low-carbon hydrogen is likely to 
increase catalyst demand within the chemicals sector.
5.3. CO 2 Utilisation
As mentioned, carbon capture and storage will be 
a critical technology for the UK to meet its net zero 
targets and with networks planned within the large 
industrial clusters there will be an opportunity to utilise 
the captured CO 2 to produce low carbon products. This 
offers a significant opportunity for catalyst and process 
development over the coming years. Figure 14 shows the 
catalysis opportunity in both the utilisation of captured 
CO2 from a waste gas stream and in direct air capture. 
It is also of note that, to lower the energy barrier for CO 2 
utilisation, there will be key requirements for renewable 
energy and low carbon hydrogen to be available for 
companies looking to develop technologies in this field.  
One of the key dependencies of any utilisation processes 
will be the associated carbon capture process; this may 
be incorporated into the utilisation process or may be 
completely separate. Either route offers opportunities 
and challenges, some of the key considerations in 
developing a process are likely to concern the gas 
mixture and the concentration of CO2. If utilising CO2 
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology29
directly from a flue gas the different components, 
concentration and flowrate need to be understood and 
variations taken into account; if utilising CO2 from a 
captured source understanding the different parameters 
and contaminants will also be critical. As such there 
is an opportunity to increase academic development 
of CCU catalysts with industry providing information 
on real-life flue streams so more appropriate testing 
can be undertaken. This will enable understanding of 
how impurities and reaction by-products impact the 
catalyst kinetics and lifecycle. The CO2 quality and 
catalyst performance should be evaluated alongside 
the requirements for CO2 purification and the desired 
specifications of the end product. Carbon capture 
processes have been developed and there are UK-based 
companies looking to deploy demonstration-scale plants.  
This capture step, whether incorporated into utilisation 
or a separate process, needs to be economically viable 
and efficient, directly impacting the economic viability of 
utilisation technologies.   
There are a range of technologies under development 
within this field each using a different approach - 
however a challenge that impacts them all is the 
identification of target products. Many academics and companies have noted that there is not enough 
understanding or information to select target products. 
Should the aim be to focus on high-value-low-volume 
products or low-value-high-volume products? Full 
techno-economic assessments would assist in this 
regard. In addition, understanding the full life cycle 
analysis impact of developed processes needs to be 
included. 
Currently there are different technologies in development 
for CCU, one of these is carboxylation reactions which 
have a relatively low energy requirement when compared 
with other technologies. Products produced from these 
processes include fertiliser products (CCm Technologies) 
or metal carbonates (Carbon8, Carbon Capture Machine, 
Cambridge Carbon Capture) which can be used in 
construction. These approaches provide examples of 
high-volume product production and with companies 
active in these areas show commercial viability.
A different approach would be to reduce CO2 to produce 
fuels or chemicals, for example, methanol or diesel, 
processes of this nature tend to require more energy 
than carboxylation reactions. An example of current 
technologies under development are the reverse water Figure 14: Catalysis CO2 opportunities
Catalysis Opportunity 
Sorbents for DACCatalysis Opportunity 
Purification, Utilisation
Catalysis Opportunity  
Catalytic Capture, Processing and utilisationLow and Carbon Hydrogen 
and Energy
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology30
gas shift reaction which if coupled with a Fischer-Tropsch 
reaction could be utilised in the production of fuels. At 
present the economics and technical demonstration of 
these technologies at scale is challenging.
Beyond this there are other technologies that can be 
developed for use in different applications. For example 
electrocatalysis can be utilised to produce e-fuels and 
other chemicals whilst bio-catalysis can be utilised to 
access high chain carbon lengths or proteins. These 
are areas with significant potential but require further 
research. In addition there is an opportunity to develop 
water tolerant catalysts that will be critical for this field 
and clean growth in general. The UK has world-leading 
academic expertise in reaction engineering, catalysis 
research and scale up which would be applicable here. 
In the development and deployment of CCU technologies 
it is critical to consider how the process will fit into the 
wider system for  example within an industrial cluster i.e. 
carbon capture, hydrogen, energy or chemical production 
so that the full economic costs and the full life cycle of the 
process can be considered and optimised. As such there 
is an opportunity to connect companies across future 
supply chains; i.e. CO2 emitters, CCS process developers, 
catalysis academics and end-users with product 
requirements to ensure a full systems approach. 
One of the challenges in this area is the market conditions and the investment required to demonstrate 
technologies. For this reason, a technology that is 
developed within a university is unlikely to be translated 
into industry as the economics and investment required 
are not favourable. The UK does however have the 
potential to manufacture fuels and chemicals in the UK 
by utilising our emitted CO2 and renewable electricity.  
This will reduce our dependency on petrochemical 
routes for products and help build more robust supply 
chains.
There is a need to inform the different communities along 
the supply chain of the challenges and opportunities 
that are available, identify key target molecules, share 
information on real-life flue gases, required operating 
conditions. Such information will inform and accelerate 
the development of CCU technologies. 
5.4. Waste to chemicals and fuels
The utilisation and valorisation of waste will play an 
important role in achieving net zero targets and the 
transition towards a circular economy. As an alternative 
feedstock different types of waste can be utilised to 
produce fuels and chemicals. The different types of 
waste will require different types of processing which 
will have associated opportunities and challenges. 
For catalysis there are multiple opportunities within 
this field including thermocatalytic gasification, low 
temperature gasification, gas clean-up and purification 
Figure 15: Schematic of how gasification of waste and the upgrading of syngas can be used to produce chemicals 
EnergyCatalysis 
Opportunity
Commodity and Fine ChemicalRefinery Products
Thermochemical/
Thermocatalytic processing
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology31and the upgrading of products to complex chemicals. 
This section discusses different opportunities around 
different feedstocks available including plastics, syngas 
and biomass.
5.4.1. Gasification of waste and upgrading of waste 
syngas
In a more circular economy the utilisation of different 
waste streams will offer an important way to recover 
chemicals and materials. Figure 15 shows a schematic of 
how a range of different waste streams could be utilised 
to make chemical or fuel products. There are multiple 
different technologies that could be utilised, and many 
will need to be coupled together in order to achieve the 
desired chemicals. There are several catalytic processes 
which could be applied in the production of chemicals 
and fuels from waste. 
In general, the first process when looking to utilise a 
waste stream will be a thermochemical route to produce 
syngas. However, the tars produced after gasification 
can be a significant challenge providing opportunities 
for catalytic tar removal systems. Thermocatalytic 
routes are also possible and continue to be researched. 
The process used will be dependent on the feedstock 
being utilised, the target purity and the composition of 
the syngas being produced. This is a key parameter. 
as different grades and compositions of syngas will be 
required in different downstream applications. Syngas 
is generally a mixture of carbon monoxide, hydrogen, 
carbon dioxide, methane and other gases, however the 
exact composition is dependent on how it is produced 
and what it is produced from. For example, syngas which 
has a high hydrogen content can be used as an energy 
vector for heat and there are UK-based companies active 
in this area. Catalytic processes can be applied in the 
production of syngas and in the cleaning of the gas prior 
to use in other downstream transformations. 
There is a significant catalytic opportunity in the 
downstream transformation of syngas to chemicals or 
fuels. Current incentives encourage the production of 
sustainable fuel and several companies are developing 
and deploying Fischer-Tropsch technology to produce 
sustainable aviation fuel using syngas. Syngas can also be utilised in the production of low carbon methanol, 
dimethyl ether and other products. 
Some of the key technical challenges encountered 
in this field include the deactivation of catalysts from 
reaction by-products, the recyclability of the catalysts, 
consistency in the purity and composition of the syngas 
required and unknown poisons deactivating the catalyst. 
This combined with a lack of understanding regarding 
which chemicals to produce can slow the development 
of low carbon products from syngas.
The production and utilisation of syngas from municipal, 
plastic or biomass waste offers an interesting opportunity 
to consider more localised facilities which could produce 
fuel for local use. Alongside the circular economy 
benefits this would also reduce transportation and 
energy requirements from waste management. The UK 
has capabilities in gasification and, if this is coupled with 
the UK catalysis strengths, it offers an opportunity to 
accelerate research for local and regional development.
5.4.2. Waste plastic to chemicals and fuels
Catalytic processes can be used to deconstruct plastics 
which can be readily re-used or mechanically recycled 
into monomers and other molecules. The main options 
for catalysis in the recycling of plastics are pyrolysis 
(cracking), hydrocracking, depolymerisation and partial 
oxidation. Pyrolysis requires high operating temperatures 
of between 500-900ºC and produces a wide range 
of hydrocarbons, with catalytic pyrolysis often having 
issues around catalyst deactivation.34 Hydrocracking 
is a catalytic process occurring in the presence of 
hydrogen and operates at temperatures of around 
300-450ºC and can produce a more selective range of 
hydrocarbons.35,36 Depolymerisation converts a polymer 
back into monomers while partial oxidation provides a 
route to producing syngas. These different technologies 
can utilise catalysis in different ways to upgrade the 
products, increase process efficiencies and decrease 
energy requirements. Monomers produced from 
depolymerisation of polymers can be reincorporated 
into the polymer supply chain, while chemicals produced 
from the different approaches can be used to produce 
polymers within other supply chains.  
34 Akah, A., J. Hernandez-Martinez, and A. Garforth. n.d. “Hydrocracking of mixed polymer waste, NovaCrack.” The University of Manchester. Accessed 2020.
35 Garforth, A. 2020. “Academic perspective:“The catalytic conversion of mixed polymer waste”.” KTN Workshop on Catalytic processing of mixed polymer waste. 
London.
36 Garforth, A., and J. Memandez-Martinez. 2017. “Enhanced Feedstcok Recycling of Plastc Waste.” Abstract from UK Catalysis Conference (UKCC). Loughborough.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology32One of the biggest challenges associated with plastics 
recycling in general is the separation of different polymer 
types, a large number of products contain additives, for 
example, carbon black, or are produced using multiple 
polymers in different layers. For the development of 
catalytic plastic pyrolysis and hydrocracking, one of 
the key questions is whether the feedstock needs to 
be separated. Is it possible to process mixtures of 
polymer waste and separate products downstream or 
do certain polymers require specific catalysts? These 
questions have led to a range of academic activity 
within the field to identify catalysts that can be applied. 
In addition to the separation of polymers the treatment 
or removal of additives from waste streams also needs 
to be considered, for example carbon black used to 
colour material and enhance performance can have a 
detrimental effect on a catalyst and material processing. 
Currently it is thought that different polymer types 
should be considered in different ways, for example the 
processing of polyamide and polyester materials could 
be completed through depolymerisation or the use of 
an acid base catalysis. There is an opportunity here to 
improve current processes to produce higher quality 
materials. There is however a need to understand how 
newer polymers for example bio-based materials are 
being incorporated and if these will impact processing or 
introduce contaminants previously not encountered. 
Another area of significant research is the processing 
of polyolefins using pyrolysis and there are several 
companies developing processes in this area for the 
production of fuel. These processes are not just catalytic, 
however there is an opportunity to enhance them by 
introducing catalysis where appropriate. In some cases, a 
level of separation is still needed to avoid deactivation of 
the catalyst; this is of course dependent on the catalyst, 
the feedstock and the process, so needs to be assessed 
on a case by case basis. An added complication is that, if 
separation is not used, the variation of material between 
batches which may have different contaminants, colours 
and rheologies which all affect the process. There is 
also a need to investigate how spent catalysts can be 
regenerated and how to reduce catalyst breakdown 
for example by abrasion during operating conditions. All of these challenges indicate that there is a need to 
bridge the industrial requirements and processes to 
the academic catalysis research to ensure industrially 
relevant catalysts are developed. Catalytic pyrolysis 
could also be utilised to process tyre waste which 
could increase efficiencies and produce products with 
increased value. The introduction of pyrolysis processes 
could offer additional opportunities for catalysis in 
the upgrading of pyrolysis oils to chemicals and in the 
cleaning of gases produced.
For the processing of flexible films generally made from 
polyethylene or polypropylene, current mechanical 
recycling methods struggle to handle the films due 
to their low density. Alternatives to pyrolysis methods 
could result in the development of hydrolysis, glycolysis, 
methanolysis or bio-catalysis routes for degradation. 
The contaminants encountered within flexible film waste 
streams could result in technical challenges, for example 
if biological components or moisture is prevalent this will 
impact the catalyst and process design. As such when 
developing catalysts and processes both the feedstock 
and target products need to be considered. 
There are UK-based companies already developing 
chemical plastic waste recycling routes and in addition 
there is a strong academic base across different 
technologies within the UK in this area. However one of 
the challenges associated with the field is that the market 
is not clear or well-defined at the current time. If a plastic 
waste product is to be utilised within the plastics supply 
chain, it will be competing with virgin feedstocks which 
are currently less expensive.  Incentives to increase the 
amount of recycled material in new products would help 
address this. 
There is also a challenge in demonstrating technologies 
at pilot and demonstration scale. For the plastic waste 
supply chain a coordinated effort across waste collectors, 
waste separators, catalysis development and process 
development will be critical to deploy chemically recycled 
products into the current chemicals supply chain. 
In addition the current public perception around plastics 
is changing the field. It will be important for companies 
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology33and academics researching the chemical recycling of 
plastic waste to understand how those waste streams are likely to change in the coming years. This may change the feedstock; the contaminants present and the volumes all of which will impact the technical and economical assessment of a process. As such keeping the community connected and collaborating will be important. 
5.4.3. Utilisation of biomass
One of the key feedstocks for the development of low carbon chemicals and fuels will be biomass. Any biomass used for the production of chemicals or fuels should not be grown on land that can be used for agriculture, however waste biomass can be utilised to produce low carbon chemicals and fuels. There are multiple different types of biomass which will require different types of processing before they can be utilised in chemical and fuel supply chains. Types of biomass could include lignin, cellulose, hemicellulose, vegetable oils and food waste.  
One approach to utilise biomass is to de-functionalise, 
i.e. remove oxygen from the materials, so that moreconventional chemicals can be obtained. Thedevelopment of robust catalysts for this without theneed for hydrogen has been identified as a key technicalchallenge in this area. Developing pyrolysis methods withhigher selectivity towards key products is a key technicalchallenge for catalysis in this area whilst minimisingthe number of products produced to avoid the need forcomplex separations downstream. Catalyst deactivationand recovery will also be important factors in thedevelopment of processes.
An alternative approach is to break down the biomass 
whilst retaining functionality to utilise the molecules for high-value applications. There is a significant amount of variability and functionality within different types of biomass that could be utilised to increase the performance of materials and products by providing new chemicals, for example increasing fire, smoke and toxicity performance of advanced polymers. One of the critical considerations for catalysis development in this approach is selectivity so that the target compounds can be produced.  Another challenge associated with catalyst development includes feedstock variability which may contain different impurities, all of which may be unknown. In addition, the quality and quantity of biomass feedstocks may not be consistent between batches which could be problematic. This selective deconstruction of biomass has been tried with little success but might be achieved in the future through bio-catalytic transformations. 
There are issues that will impact both the pyrolysis and 
breakdown of biomass, one of these being that biomass tends to have high moisture content. Therefore, catalysts developed may need to operate in aqueous conditions or remain active under humid conditions.  Separation technologies will also need to be incorporated into the process. The UK has significant capability around the development of industrial biotechnology processes and biomass utilisation, as such connecting this active community to the catalysis community could provide new routes to explore and exploit the potential of biomass for use in the chemical supply chain. 
5.5. Clean air
‘Clean air’ involves the removal of pollutants from the air which could be indoor or outdoor air, at point source or dispersed. The issue of air pollutants has become more important as the impact air quality has on public health becomes better understood. In 2019 the UK government released the Clean Air Strategy that identifies the key pollutants and sets targets for emission reduction for 2030 in order to protect human health.
37 
The UK Government has identified five key pollutants and has targets for their reduction, the pollutants include fine particulate matter (PM), ammonia (NH 3), nitrogen 
oxides (NOx), sulphur dioxides (SO 2) and non-methane 
volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs). One of the first steps in understanding the targets and how emissions might be reduced is the development of monitoring and sensing systems that are able to measure current pollutant levels. There is a significant amount of work in this area; however monitoring pollutants is only part of the story and there is a need to look at technologies that can remove pollutants from the air. Catalysis has for many years played a pivotal role in the reduction of emissions from the automotive sector and there is a 
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology34significant opportunity for catalysis to enable industries 
to meet the 2030 emissions targets. Alongside catalysis, 
different adsorption technologies will also be developed 
and deployed to address the emissions targets, this will 
be a challenge for catalysis as adsorbents tend to be 
lower-cost materials and may be the preferred solution 
for some sectors.
The main sources of fine particulate matter can include 
industrial combustion, domestic burning and road 
transport and similar sources are identified for NOx with 
road transport being the largest contributor and SOx 
where energy generation and industrial combustion are 
major sources of emissions. Different emission sources 
will have different catalyst requirements in terms of 
cost, operating conditions and performance. Catalysts 
developed for the automotive industry which can remove 
some PM, NOx and SOx emissions could be applied into 
other sectors but further testing and development is 
likely to be required. There are commercial opportunities 
in the retrofitting of maritime and rail vehicles and 
technical opportunities in the development of catalysts 
for low temperature applications. Due to the nature of 
these pollutant sources applications will generally be at 
point of source however there is also an opportunity for 
catalytic removal of these pollutants through direct air 
capture. For example outdoor paints or other catalytic 
coatings could be utilised in locations where there may 
be higher concentrations, for example motorway road 
signs or around school entrances. Standardised testing 
for these materials will be important to ensure that 
products perform in the expected way. 
The main source of ammonia is agriculture. This 
means the source is very diffuse and it can therefore 
be challenging to reduce emissions. Whilst direct air 
capture of ammonia requires investigation, another 
(possibly simpler) approach may include identification of 
point sources; for example, chicken houses are known 
to be a concentrated source of ammonia emissions. 
There are currently ammonia slip catalysts used in the 
automotive sector which, with further development, may 
be applicable under other conditions. There is also an opportunity to investigate catalyst selectivity for nitrogen 
or identify alternative methods for fertiliser delivery. In 
addition, ammonia is a potential energy vector of the 
future; if this develops further pollution from ammonia 
is likely to increase making research into removal or 
abatement technologies more important. 
Non-methane VOCs are a broad collective of different 
compounds each with its own challenges and 
opportunities, the main sources for VOCs are industrial 
processes and household products. Identifying which 
VOCs have the largest impact on public health, where 
they are produced and understanding how they could be 
catalytically removed is the initial step. The abatement 
of VOCs to increase indoor air quality is already an 
area where companies are operating and there are 
paints which can be used to remove formaldehyde. The 
removal of formaldehyde is a growing trend globally 
with some countries looking at implementing legislation 
in the area. Testing of products for indoor air quality 
is challenging as real-world conditions are difficult to 
mimic. For these products there is also likely to be a 
movement towards base metal catalysts over PGMS due 
to cost and recoverability. 
Across all the pollutants there is a need to be able to test 
catalysts under real-world conditions, this would increase 
understanding of the catalyst mechanism, poisoning, 
lifetime etc. Generally the catalyst development will 
be dependent on the application i.e. the pollutant, the 
operating conditions, the lifetime etc. It is also important to 
identify the applications where catalysis adds value over 
the use of an absorption system.
In addition as more alternative feedstocks are utilised in 
fuels there is a need to understand how this will affect air 
quality. There may be as yet unidentified pollutants that 
will require abatement or an increase in those known 
pollutants. There is excellent UK capability within this 
field which can be developed further with increased 
collaboration across sectors which require emissions 
control.  
37  (Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs 2019)
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology35

UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology365.6. Water treatment and catalysis
Safe and reliable water and wastewater is essential for 
everyday use domestically and industrially. So with the 
increasing population and greater demands on water 
usage coupled with the challenges of climate change, 
then maximising the efficient use of this valuable and 
essential resource is critical. At the end of 2019 Ofwat, 
the economic regulator of the water sector in England 
and Wales, announced a £200m innovation fund 
providing opportunities for collaborative R&D projects38. 
The water sector is now looking at how innovation and 
new technologies can improve performance while 
safeguarding water users and the environment from 
source to tap.39 Catalysis can be a key enabler for 
technologies that could help respond to the challenges 
faced, and the water industries are willing to explore 
collaborative catalysis projects. To aid the transfer of 
innovation within the water industries there are facilities 
for testing new technologies.  For example, Scottish 
water has a clean water test facility, and Severn Trent 
has a resource recovery and innovation centre at 
which they are exploring the recovery of hydrogen from 
ammonia using electrochemistry. Within academia 
there is catalysis research and capability that would be 
applicable to the water industries, for example, the UK 
Catalysis Hub. 
The scale and number of works for each water company 
can vary and problem molecules differ between the 
different catchment areas of each company. In addition 
to the removal of harmful and unwanted molecules, 
water companies also want to achieve energy and 
resource efficient processes where additional value can 
be derived from residual energy and platform molecules 
that can be sold to the chemical and agrichemicals 
industries. Examples could be to use a membrane 
anaerobic bioreactor that could be an energy neutral 
treatment plant, upgrading biomethane to ethane, using 
an advanced oxidation process (AOP) with a combination 
of catalysts and additives. An ideal solution would be to 
achieve chemical-free treatment of water utilising small 
scale modular systems to ‘pre-treat’ waste streams, 
for example, hospitals at source. When designing catalytic solutions the challenges faced will include the 
scaling-up to large volumes of water and providing fast 
reaction times.  The technologies need to be tested on 
‘real life’ water and consideration needs to be given to 
degradation/by-products and if they are regulated, for 
example the degradation of atrazine to hydroxyatrazine 
by UV is still a problem. There are many challenges 
where different catalysis types could be utilised. Table 4 
gives a list of potential challenges and opportunities for 
catalysis to be an enabler of new technologies. Other 
challenges not in Table 4 include the need for solutions 
around perfluorinated alkylsulfonates (PFAS), the 
regeneration of active carbon and anti-fouling. Priority 
areas for catalysis and water treatment to focus on are 
the removal of microplastics from slurry, removal of 
trace taste and odour contaminants and the recovery of 
coagulants.
38 Hailstone, J. 2019. WWT. December 16. Accessed April 27, 2020. https://wwtonline.co.uk/news/-200m-innovation-fund-confirmed-by-ofwat.
39 Ofwat. 2019. Time to act, together: Ofwat’s strategy. Birmingham: Ofwat.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology37

UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology38Table 4: Potential challenges and opportunities for water treatment and catalysis
Challenge area Challenge 
Taste and odour treatment Obtaining the correct taste and odour is important and non-compliance can lead 
to Ofwat charges. Geosmin, MIB (2-methylisoborneol), and Trichloroanisole are 
detectable at trace amounts and need to be removed.
Regeneration of ion 
exchange resins and  high 
ionicity water treatment Miex®️ resin is currently used as a water treatment and is a magnetic ion exchange 
process where the resin is added to a coagulant. The coagulant is used to capture 
large organics and the resin is used to capture light organics. After separation the 
resin is regenerated using a brine wash. The brine wash then contains organics and 
coagulant along with nitrates and phosphorus. High ionicity water from this process 
and other sources need treating before reuse. 
Coagulants and  
waste sludgeCoagulants used to remove contaminants from wastewater treatment produce a 
huge amount of waste sludge which goes to agricultural waste. There are three 
requirements, firstly to recover the coagulants, secondly to reduce the volume of 
sludge, for example, sludge can be 70-85% water. Thirdly is to derive additional 
value from recovering Fe, Al, Pb, Zn, P and Humic substances so they can be utilised 
in chemicals and agriculture, for example, catalytic pyrolysis or using the iron to 
catalytically remove the organics whilst leaving the iron for repurposing or using 
catalytic pyrolysis.
Low concentration 
pharmaceutical 
contaminants removalThe selective and safe removal of pharmaceutical contaminant and antimicrobial 
resistance (AMR) from wastewater is required and future regulations could lead to 
charges if this is not achieved. Treatment of pharmaceuticals in wastewater could be 
done using small scale modular systems to pretreat waste streams producing higher 
concentrations which could make separation of problem molecules easier.
Hydrogen productionWaste streams rich in ammonia can be used to generate hydrogen, for example, via 
electrochemistry, for energy or other uses.
Grey water treatment and 
reuseAbstraction from the environment needs to be reduced and attention is turning 
towards the reuse of greywater. However solutions need to overcome the public health 
and social awareness implications with regards to treatment and interaction with 
cleaned water. Opportunities are to look for the direct reuse of wastewater for potable 
applications and using greywater reuse to move away from centralised models e.g. 
move towards closed loop housing systems with localised, small scale wastewater 
treatment.
Removal of phosphorus 
from waterThe water framework is forcing the acceptable level of phosphorus down. Ferric 
sulphate is used to remove the phosphorus which new technologies could be used to 
recover the Fe and reutilised. Alternatively can biocatalysis and algae bioreactors be 
used to remove the phosphorus.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology39Recovery of cellulose from 
waterCurrent projects are exploring how to recover valuable materials from wastewater, 
for example, cellulose, nutrients, lipids and bio-plastics. Within the paper and pulp 
industry the option to recover cellulose from the process wastewater is being 
explored. Some technology already exists, for example, Cirtec B.V., but is deemed not 
to be suitable for all applications.
Pesticide removalFor a large amount of pesticides the regulatory limit for wildlife is much lower than 
the human toxic level, for example, metaldehyde is likely to be banned because of the 
issue for wildlife while it isn't an issue for drinking water. Pesticides removal needs to 
be selective and the technology needs to produce safe by-products.
Treatment of microplasticsMicroplastics currently remain in the sludge which goes to landfill. This is another area 
of opportunity to remove a component of wastewater to improve the environmental 
impact but also to extract value by breaking down the microplastic to a platform 
molecule that then can be reused.
DiscolorationTechnologies are needed that will reduce the colour and minimise the use of 
coagulants.
Phenol removalPhenol removal has been used to give 60% reduction using Fe and Pd catalysts, but 
challenges arise with catalyst stability.
Disinfection by-productsDisinfection is used to kill viruses using chlorinated molecules. By-products from 
disinfection can include trihalomethanes, Haloacetic acid as well as nitrogenated 
and brominated products. Alternative technologies for disinfection are needed or 
technologies for removal of the by-products.
Algal toxinsClimate change is causing an increase in toxins from algae and generating more 
organic matter that needs methods of treating. Geosmin and MIB (2-methylisoborneol) 
are both generated by algae and can impact taste and odour of water.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology40
5.7. Other opportunities  
5.7.1. Polymer and rubber
Higher functionality polymers will be a key component of 
clean growth as the need for lightweighting continues. 
Polymers that are designed for end-of-life may include 
integrated catalysts which are activated when required. 
The production of new polymers which could be bio-
based may require new polymerisation catalysts.
Econic Technologies is an example of how strong 
catalysis research and innovation is being leveraged in 
this area. Breakthrough catalytic research conducted in 
Imperial College London was being carried out on the 
conversion of waste CO2 into the production of polyols for 
polyurethanes. The novel catalytic technology enabled 
Econic Technologies to be formed as a spin-out company 
in 2011 and it has validated the work at pilot scale and 
continues to secure additional investment.40, 41, 42
5.7.2. Carbon efficiency 
Alongside the larger system changes required for clean 
growth there are also opportunities to increase carbon 
efficiencies within current technologies and processes. With the aim of maximising the use of carbon from fossil 
based sources and extracting value by focussing on 
chemicals production. This has driven the shift towards, 
gas-to-chemicals (GTC), coal-to-chemicals (CTC) and 
crude-oil to chemicals (COTC), all of which have been 
made possible by catalyst developments. Carbon 
efficiency is not the strongest opportunity for the UK as 
there is limited capability in refinery catalysts, however 
the UK does have experience on natural gas and coal 
conversions. Gaining carbon efficiencies in current fossil 
based processes will be important especially for the 
short to medium term.
5.8. Clean growth conclusion
There are multiple opportunities for catalysis within the 
UK’s clean growth opportunity, these are in many ways 
interconnected and fit into the wider net zero landscape. 
Figure 16 shows a schematic of how different clean 
growth technologies interact. One of the key enablers 
that these technologies (hydrogen production, CCU, 
waste to chemicals) all require is the need for renewable 
energy; without low cost renewable energy many of the 
CO2 emission reductions will be negated by the use of 
energy which produces CO 2.
Figure 16: Schematic showing the interaction of clean growth technologies
40 Econic Technologies Ltd. 2019. About Us: Econic Technologies Ltd. March. http://econic-technologies.com/about-us/.
41 Econic Technologies Ltd. 2019. Econic Technologies Ltd: News. March. http://econic-technologies.com/news/econic-wins-447000-tsb-grant/.
42 University of Oxford. 2019. Charlotte Williams Research. March. http://cwilliams.chem.ox.ac.uk/home.CO2 EmmisionsDirect Air 
Capture (DAC)Low Carbon 
Hydrogen 
ProductionWaste 
(including 
biomass & 
plastics)
Capture CO2 
(CCS)Renewable 
EnergySnygas
Refinery Products/
Commodity Chemicals
Chemicals
FuelsEnergy
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology41Low carbon hydrogen is one of the largest opportunities 
for the UK and creating new catalysts. The two 
main options for the UK are water hydrolysis and 
novel reforming processes, but to make low carbon 
hydrogen commercially viable at scale, capabilities in 
carbon capture utilisation and storage (CCUS) must be 
considered as part of the solution.  With the UK’s strong 
position around the production of hydrogen, fuel cells 
and electrolysers there is an opportunity to build on the 
current capability and make advances in the area of low 
carbon hydrogen. 
Carbon dioxide utilisation and storage is another 
opportunity for the UK and CCS networks are currently 
under development within the large industrial clusters. 
The identification of what products to produce from the 
captured CO 2 is a key issue in order to develop catalysts 
and processes which will be commercially viable. The 
combination of renewable energy, low carbon hydrogen 
and CO 2 conversion to produce chemicals, plastics and 
fuels offers a significant opportunity. However the field is 
large and challenging, innovations should target platform 
chemicals with functional benefits.
The utilisation of different waste streams to produce 
fuels and chemicals offers additional opportunities for 
catalyst development. The UK has large quantities of 
biogas which can be converted to chemicals and an 
area of exploration is catalysts for converting refineries 
to utilise hydrogenated vegetable oil (HVO). There is 
a lot of activity around polymers and the UK’s biggest 
opportunities are around waste utilisation which would 
accelerate the adoption of a circular economy. A 
number of routes for the degradation of polymers are 
being explored including, depolymerisation, pyrolysis 
to bio-oils, gasification to syngas and the subsequent 
downstream conversions to methane. Additionally 
the UK should focus on innovations providing greater 
functionality which can also utilise alternative feedstocks, 
for example, biomass. Biotechnology is a particular 
strength for the UK to leverage.Other areas of catalysis opportunities are in clear air, 
water and high functionality polymers. In all these 
areas there are collaboration opportunities which could 
increase the use of catalysis in new areas and develop 
new products for use in a range of applications and 
sectors.
The UK has catalysis strengths in a number of areas 
within clean growth however most need collaborative 
programmes in order to develop catalysts and processes 
for specific feedstocks and products. 
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology426.1. Introduction to healthy ageing/pharmaceutical 
manufacturing
Globally, the fine chemicals market, which includes 
pharmaceuticals, agrichemicals, flavour and fragrances, 
and consumer chemicals is forecast to grow the 
fastest with a CAGR of 9.3% per annum up until 2025. 
This sector has greater focus on homogeneous and 
biocatalysis, and key topics for patents in the UK 
are focused on therapeutics and heterocycles for 
inflammation and cancer treatments. This is reflective 
of the strong pharmaceutical presence in the UK and 
the number of CROs (contract research organisations) 
and CDMOs (contract development and manufacturing 
organisations) present. Pharmaceutical manufacturing 
forms the focus for the rest of this chapter, although, 
it is worth noting that some of the topics below will 
be of benefit to the rest of the fine chemicals sector. 
Figure 7 earlier in the report shows that the UK catalysis 
market in fine chemicals is worth $18m and enables a 
downstream benefit to the pharmaceutical industry of an 
estimated $20bn and in the UK for 2018 the manufacturer 
of pharmaceuticals generated £10bn GVA with a total 
turnover of £35bn43. The UK’s strength in biotechnology 
is particularly relevant for the pharmaceuticals sector. 
Finally it is worth noting that to support the healthy 
ageing grand challenge there are other niche but 
important applications of catalysis, such as food 
preservation. By using catalytic sensors on food 
packaging where there is a requirement to control 
the level of oxygen there is a low cost, need for non-
toxic, food contact catalysts that can operate at 
low temperatures. The sensors would need to be 
incorporated into the plastic film packaging or whatever 
packaging displaces it.  6.2. Pharmaceutical manufacturing
For the manufacturing of medicines chemo and bio 
catalysis has an important role. With an increasing and 
ageing population, catalysis allows new chemistries 
to be developed that produce fewer impurities and by-
products, whilst minimising product work-up, hence, 
balancing specificity, conversion and yields to deliver 
economic value. There are many challenges that 
innovation in catalysis can address to improve processes 
for making pharmaceutical products and will support 
the move towards smaller, more agile and continuous/
pseudo-continuous manufacturing for the production of 
personalised medicines. 
Catalyst innovation and development in pharmaceuticals 
is required to provide faster reactions, lower toxicity 
and reduced impurities/by-products. This will need 
developments in catalyst design including support 
structures as well as the techniques and technologies 
that will enable quicker scale-up times. However, 
due to the long development phases and regulatory 
requirements in the discovery, development and 
commercialisation of pharmaceuticals, the selection of 
key process parameters needs to be made as early as 
possible. This can drive pharmaceutical companies to 
select commercially available catalysts at an early stage 
of synthesis development as flexibility tightens as the 
scale increases. With a commercially available catalyst it 
is easier to evaluate the security of supply along with the 
materials cost, sustainability and viability at larger scales. 
When determining the optimal synthetic route a widely 
adopted industry approach to chemical synthesis and 
developing APIs, is the SELECT criteria for evaluating a 
process (see Table 5)44,45. To drive innovation, changes 
need to be developed and implemented early, but any 
change will need to meet the SELECT criteria.6. Healthy ageing/pharmaceutical manufacturing
43 (Office for National Statistics 2020)
44 Chem21. n.d. Chem21: Recap of the SELECT criteria. Accessed May 2020. http://learning.chem21.eu/process-design/-/route-selection/introduction-to-the-
select-criteria/#citekey_1.
45 Butters, M, D Catterick, A Craig, A Curzons, D Dale, A Gillmore, S P Green, I Marziano, J-P Sherlock, and W White. 2006. “Critical Assessment of Pharmaceutical 
Processes - A Rationale for Chaniging the Synthetic Route.” Chemical Reviews, March 8: 3002-3027.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology43

UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology44Table 5: SELECT Criteria46, 47
Example criteria
Safety Thermal, reactivity, hazards, toxicity (e.g. of reagents), explosivity at the required scale.
Environment Solvent/reagents used and impact on the environment. Volume and na-ture of waste.
Legal IP, freedom to operate, legalities around chemicals compound use.
Economics Cost targets.
Control Achieving quality specifications. Process control e.g. O 2 control.
Throughput Raw materials, manufacturing time, yields, amount of work-up.
The catalysis priority areas for pharmaceutical 
manufacturing are related to developing catalysts 
for synthesising new chemistries and for smart 
manufacturing processes, which includes continuous/
pseudo-continuous processes and hybrid catalysis. 
Opportunities exist in areas such as photocatalysis, 
biocatalysis and acid catalysis with common challenges 
that need addressing relating to solubility, slow reaction 
rates, cross functionality, feedstock/substrate variability, 
solvent compatibility, toxicity of catalysts, oxygen 
sensitivity and the closed-loop recovery and recycling 
of catalysts. The need for early development requires 
methods for accelerating faster development cycles, 
for example, high throughput experimentation and 
predictive modelling of catalysts. Overall there is also a 
need for open access and standardisation of data output, 
including negative results, to feed into future predictions. 
6.2.1. Smart manufacturing of pharmaceuticals
 
6.2.1.1. Continuous and pseudo-continuous 
manufacturing
It is estimated that the overall benefits of transitioning 
away from batch process to continuous pharmaceutical manufacturing are significant. The FDA are actively 
promoting the modernisation of drug manufacture and 
provide resources and information to help facilitate the 
transition, for example, ‘Modernizing the way drugs 
are made: A transition to continuous manufacturing’ in 
May 201748 and ‘FDA supports critical research to spur 
innovation for continuous manufacturing technology to 
support and advance drug and biologics development’ in 
Aug 201849. However regulation still needs amending to 
compensate for changes in methodology. 
In 2012, the Novartis-MIT Center for Continuous 
Manufacture published a web article that ‘continuous 
drug manufacturing offers speed and lower costs’ with 
estimations that the total cost savings of switching to 
continuous manufacturing range from between 15 
to 50%50. A 2015 publication from the AMSCI project 
Remedies (Reconfiguring medicines end-to-end supply) 
also reports that most pharmaceutical companies operate 
at levels of between 3 and 4 sigma with regards to the 
quality and reproducibility of the manufacturing process 
and right-first-time production, costing the global industry 
$20bn annually51. Examples of benefits from switching 
from batch to continuous processing range from52:
46  (Chem21 n.d.)
47  (Butters, et al. 2006)
48  U.S. Food & Drug Adminstration. 2017. Modernizing the Way Drugs Are Made: A Transition to Continuous Manufacturing. May. Accessed May 29, 2020. https://
www.fda.gov/Drugs/NewsEvents/ucm557448.htm.
49  U.S. Food & Drug Administration. 2018. FDA supports critical research to spur innovation for continuous manufacturing technology to support and advance drug 
and biologics development. Aug. Accessed May 29, 2020. https://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/FDAInBrief/ucm615431.htm.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology45• reducing manufacturing times from hours to minutes 
giving opportunities for significant cost reduction 
(capex and opex) by allowing a smaller equipment 
footprint;
• 16% economic gain when a system was completely 
transformed to continuous production;
• >30% higher net present value at the end of the 
operating period.
In this area there are options for either developing end-
to-end continuous processes, a single stage continuous 
process or even a pseudo-continuous process. However, 
although the benefits of continuous manufacturing 
are well stated, achieving this goal remains difficult, 
especially for a complete process. Even in areas where 
success may be achieved it still remains a challenge 
to develop the business case when existing assets 
and infrastructure are a factor. Additionally, along with 
the requirement of new equipment there is a need for 
upskilling of the workforce which makes the move away 
from batch processing difficult. 
An Innovate UK and EPSRC funded Knowledge 
Transfer Partnership between Northumbria University 
and Sterling Pharma Ltd provides an example of how 
innovation can enable biocatalysis in flow53, 54. The 
project aims for Sterling Pharma Limited, which is 
a CDMO, to be able to expand their manufacturing 
capabilities for fine chemicals and pharmaceuticals 
by developing a novel biocatalytic process. Sterling 
Pharma utilise biocatalysis reactions using reduced 
quantities of a bound lipase and the project will develop 
the understanding around enzyme screening, directed 
evolution, immobilisation of enzymes and the use of 
enzymes in continuous/semi-continuous processing. 
This will enable the company to use enzymes for organic 
synthesis and conduct initial screening, development, 
scale-up and manufacture of tonne quantities of cGMP 
product in flow conditions.
 
For continuous manufacture, complete system design 
that considers conversions and yields, is important when considering the requirements of the catalyst, for example, 
the highest catalyst selectivity can result in impurities 
which are difficult to separate and will increase work-up 
costs. Furthermore the catalyst needs to be designed for 
the purpose of continuous flow, with the correct catalyst 
structure and support for the scale of the continuous 
flow reactor, for example, it is difficult to find off the shelf 
50-400µm heterogeneous catalysts and the required 
catalyst supports to the correct particle to volume ratio. 
Hence the forming and shape characterisation of the 
catalyst is important.
Furthermore it is important when regarding the system 
to consider the separation and recovery of expensive 
catalysts. The is exemplified in two collaborative 
research and development (cR&D) Innovate UK funded 
projects. The first is the 2012/13 project ‘Recyclable 
Catalyst Technology for Cross-Coupling Reactions at 
Manufacturing Scale’ which was a collaboration of 
PhosphonicS Limited, Albany Molecular Research (UK) 
Limited, AstraZeneca, CatSci Limited, Syngenta Limited 
and the University of Edinburgh. The second was a 
2015/16 project ‘Total Recovery of All Platinum group 
metals (TRAP)’ which was a collaboration between 
PhosphonicS Limited, Veolia ES (UK) Limited and the 
University of Bath. Both of these projects consider the 
recovery of the expensive precious group metal based 
catalyst compounds from chemical processes used for 
the manufacture of pharmaceuticals and chemicals. To 
avoid expensive and energy-intensive processing, the 
innovations aimed to recover compounds in a low energy, 
novel semi-continuous ‘catch and release’ integrated 
process. The technology catches the catalyst and is 
separated then released in an active form for the next 
reaction.55
Opportunities for catalysis in continuous flow also exist 
with redox, photoredox, base metals and a range of 
atom inefficient processes where flow can provide gains 
in efficiency. Problems arise with needing to ensure 
the robustness and stability of the catalyst, physically 
and chemically while also preventing deactivation and 
50  Trafton, A. 2012. MIT News. March. Accessed May 29, 2020. http://news.mit.edu/2012/manufacturing-pharmaceuticals-0312. 
51 Srai, J S, C Badman, C Krumme, M Futran, and C Johnston. 2015. “Future supply chains enabled by continuous processing - opportunities and challenges: May 20-
21, 2014 continuous manufacturing symposium.” Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, March: 840-849.
52 Srai, J S, T Harrington, L Alinaghian, and M Phillips. 2015. “Evaluating the potential for the continuous processing of pharmaceutical products – a supply network 
perspective.” Chemical Engineering and Processing: Process Intensification, Nov: 248-258.
53 Sterling Pharma Solutions. n.d. Collaborative Expertise in Biocatalysis. Accessed May 29, 2020. https://www.sterlingpharmasolutions.com/technologies/
biocatalysis/.
54 Innovate UK. n.d. Knowledge Transfer Partnership - Details. Accessed May 29, 2020. https://info.ktponline.org.uk/action/details/partnership.aspx?id=11726.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology46poisoning of the catalyst over time. With the scale of 
continuous manufacturing the volume of the catalyst 
needed is small; as a result there is little to encourage 
catalyst manufacturers to develop new catalysts 
especially with the need for a 20-year guarantee of 
catalyst supply. For example, for short runs (30 mins) 
there may be a high catalyst loading but for longer 
runs (14 hours) the catalyst loading can be as low as 
0.01%. To overcome this there is the opportunity for the 
pharmaceutical industry to conduct pre-competitive 
cR&D with other fine chemical manufacturers such as 
agrichemicals, flavours and fragrances. 
The UK has good general capabilities in continuous 
manufacturing and process design with a good mix of 
disciplines covering chemistry, engineering, process 
analytics, physical properties and modelling. There are 
also companies able to supply flow equipment at lab and 
production scale.  However for the area of catalysis there 
is a need for increased kinetics capability in order to 
understand flow reactions. Academically there are good 
capabilities in flow, for example, CMAC (Strathclyde), 
ROAR (Imperial College) and the IPRD (Leeds). 
However CMAC does not focus on catalysis. ROAR 
also has capabilities in kinetics and high throughput 
experimentation (HTE). For industry, working with a 
university can lead to issues with IP and the university 
programmes can be prohibitively long.
Exemplars are needed to help demonstrate the 
successful business case for adopting change and to 
accelerate innovation, while cR&D is needed with other 
sectors such as agrichemicals, flavours and fragrances, 
to support catalysis synthesis and up-scaling in catalyst 
forming. Cross sector support would assist catalyst 
manufacturers, especially SMEs, to develop catalysts 
for continuous flow when the pharmaceutical demand 
is for such small volumes. There is also a need to have 
schemes that encourage fast turnaround of industry-led 
projects as universities programmes take too long. Within 
the UK there is also limited access to continuous flow 
pilot scale equipment which focuses on catalysis and 
provides the associated upskilling in both catalysis and 
continuous flow capabilities.
6.2.1.2.  Combined chemo and biocatalysis
An area of growing interest is to have combined ‘hybrid’ catalysis which utilises multiple catalysts in a single 
environment with each catalytic process influencing 
the next56. The combination of biocatalytic and chemo 
catalytic reactions in a one-pot process with an aqueous 
medium represents an economically and ecologically 
attractive concept in organic synthesis. Especially 
with the potential to avoid the time-consuming work-
up steps of intermediates whilst also reducing waste 
and increasing overall capacity. Development of 
chemoenzymatic one-pot processes in water, as the 
solvent of choice, has emerged with proof of concepts 
for the combination of biotransformations with metal and 
organocatalysts and are well published. Identifying the 
shortest and cheapest route from feedstock to actives is 
one of the biggest challenges in catalyst development, 
which makes hybrid catalysis solutions appealing. If 
the catalysts could be optimised to cope with racemic 
mixtures, then it could prevent a loss of up to 50% of the 
starting material.
Currently very little is known to be done in the UK in this 
area and the UK is potentially lagging behind with most 
R&D likely ranging from early to late stage research. It is 
accepted that in a multistep sequence it is possible to 
have these different catalysts in use, however combining 
biocatalysis with chemo catalysis would have some 
challenges to overcome. The main technical challenge 
is that biocatalysts often favour ambient temperatures 
and pressures along with mild pHs unlike metal catalysts. 
To overcome this would require immobilisation of the 
biocatalyst and biotransformation steps occurring first 
in the process followed by the chemical transformation. 
Identifying and developing immobilisation technologies 
to allow multiple catalysts to co-exist in the same pot 
will require consultation with experts in immobilisation 
and encapsulation due to the potential fragility of the 
biocatalyst.
Advances in this area will require organisations who 
can work at the interface between both disciplines. A 
precompetitive catalyst library also needs generating 
and would need to be collated and built by a community 
of organisations working collectively to explore chemo/
bio-catalysis. To be able to design the system it will be 
necessary to ascertain what combinations of catalysts 
could be combined and in what sequence. Selectivity 
of the biocatalysts would require addressing as multiple 
55 Innovate UK, UK Research & Innovation. . “Innovate UK funded projects since 2004.” GOV.UK. Accessed May 2020. https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/innovate-uk-funded-projects. 
56 (Barroso, et al. 2015)
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology47bio-transformations can occur simultaneously leaving a 
mixture that requires costly separations. For this reason 
it will also be important to understand the impact on 
impurities and contamination on such a system.  An 
evaluation of the overall cost of a hybrid system will be 
needed with a potential requirement to reduce the cost 
of producing the enzyme or whole-cell biocatalyst. 
Within the UK there are organisations with strong 
capabilities in chem and biocatalysis, for example, UK 
Catalysis Hub, Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, 
Leeds University, Birmingham University, CatSci Ltd. 
However, the UK is limited on the number of organisations 
with hybrid catalysis. An example of an organisation that 
has been successful with hybrid catalysis is Ingenza who 
has used chemo and bio catalysis in a one-pot reduction 
of oxidation for a pharmaceutical intermediate. Therefore 
there is a need to ensure that experts and organisations 
with capabilities in both chemo/biocatalysis work together 
on a complete system to ensure compatibility of both 
technologies.
In order to address this challenge there is a need 
for GMP infrastructure for scale-up. The current UK 
infrastructure for bulk enzyme production is limited with 
most support being for the food industry, home and 
personal care products. Both CPI and Biocatalyst Ltd 
have a 10,000-litre capability but neither operates to 
GMP. For supply to pharmaceuticals, enzyme producers 
would also have to be in a strong enough position to be 
able to guarantee that the supply of enzymes could be 
secured for numerous years. 
A hybrid solution utilising chemo and biocatalysis in one 
pot could provide some distinct advantages. It could 
enable the shortest route from feedstock to actives while 
minimising separation, work-up and waste. However UK 
advances in this area are limited and a long way from 
commercialisation. It would require conducting early 
stage collaborative R&D led by the research councils to 
collate potential compatible catalyst options. To support 
this activity would also require additional capabilities for 
scaling-up.
6.2.2. Catalysts for new chemistries
The pharmaceutical industry needs to use catalysts for 
exploiting current and new chemistries to isolate new molecules to be used as active ingredients. Therefore 
opportunities exist around the current transformations 
and those that are likely to be popular in the future. There 
are opportunities around using non-precious group metal 
(PGM) catalysts, catalysts for CH activations and new 
photocatalysts. With regards to catalytic transformations 
then an initial starting point is to explore those 
chemistries that are suited to faster development cycles 
through the use of high throughput experimentation 
(HTE). The paper by Mennen, S et al 2019, The Evolution 
of High-Throughput Experimentation in Pharmaceutical 
Development and Perspectives on the Future, ranks 
the chemistries used by large pharmaceuticals and a 
forecast for those likely to be the most popular in the next 
3 to 5 years57. The catalytic reactions types which were 
screened the most were:
• Suzuki−Miyaura reactions;
• Buchwald−Hartwig amination;
• biocatalysis transformations include transaminases, 
keto-reductases, and hydrolases;
• Pd-Borylation;
• asymmetric hydrogenation.
The paper forecasts that in the future the reactions 
above will still be the most favoured, but the reactions 
below will see a significant increase in popularity:
• Pd-mediated CH activation;
• new photocatalysis;
• catalytic amide formation;
• Ullman coupling.
6.2.2.1. Non PGM catalysed processes
Precious group metal (PGM) catalysts rely on critical 
raw materials which have limited availability. Although 
PGMs are recycled, over the next twenty years there 
will be an increasing demand and cost for extracting 
more PGMs. With limited availability and safety related 
issues when manufacturing with PGMs, then there will 
be a need for non-precious metal catalysed processes. 
These will provide the discovery of new chemistries 
through the expansion of the chemical space available, 
leading to new products with lower toxicity and better 
pharmacokinetics, chirality and activity. These catalysts 
can lead to a reduction in costs and a greater security of 
supply with less exposure to raw material price volatility.  
There are options to explore nature-inspired solutions 
and green chemistries.
57 Mennen, S M, C Alhambra, C Liana Allen, M Barberis, S Berritt, T A Brandt, A D Campbell, et al. 2019. “The Evolution of High-Throughput Experimentation in 
Pharmaceutical Devleopment and Perspectives on the Future.” Organic Process Research & Devleopment (ACS Publications) 23 (6): 1213-1242.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology48An ideal situation would be to develop a catalyst that 
becomes the ‘Suzuki’ of non-precious metals. For a 
broad topic there are numerous options for different 
approaches; for example, Iron is under explored. An 
approach to developing these catalysts could be to focus 
on methods that use a data-led approach and favour the 
use of high throughput experimentation. There also may 
be options to learn from defining the nearest equivalents 
for achieving the required chemistry/conversion. Ligands 
maps combined with predictive modelling could also 
help to focus on new chemistries. Utilising flow chemistry 
could allow experiments with higher pressures during 
discovery stages. A challenge with these reactions is that 
the activity of the catalyst can be difficult to characterise 
as they are used in such small amounts.
Ullman reactions using copper have been used by 
AstraZeneca to get successful results. However in other 
areas the development is closer to early research. There 
have been recent reviews on the use of Co, Ni and Mn 
catalysts and a project in Lipshutz with Ni on charcoal. 
LIKAT, Germany and German Catalysis Society (GeCatS) 
are seen as leaders in this area and although it is still 
academic research, they are likely to be the closest to 
industrial applications. Within the UK there are several 
groups researching Cu catalysis for example, Catalysis Hub, Leeds University, Bedford Catalysis (University of 
Bristol). Capability within the UK to support research 
is the ROAR centre for kinetic studies. To support this 
work there needs to be an STFC Hartree high power 
computing equivalent capability for homogeneous and 
biocatalysis. In the chemicals sector there has been 
more work on catalysis and critical raw materials, for 
example, the NOVACAM EU project, but the conditions 
are different than those of fine chemicals58.
There are analytical challenges and a need for 
mechanistic understanding that will require pre-
competitive collaborative working to help focus and 
narrow the number of choices to explore in a large 
chemical space. Collaborative cross-sector activities 
conducted with agrichemicals and other price-sensitive 
industries to identify processes which are economically 
at risk and could serve as a starting point for relevant 
chemistries. Collaboration across sectors will be needed 
to develop these catalysts for example, AI-informed 
retrosynthesis.
An obstacle to developing non-PGM chemistries is that 
the PGMs are a well-established solution and can exhibit 
superior selectivity. Non-PGM catalysts can be cheaper 
but can have limited compatibility with functional groups 
and longer development times making them unviable. 
58 NOVACAM. n.d. Project Summary. Accessed May 2020. https://novacam.eu/project-summary/.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology49The current justification for using a non-PGM catalyst 
can be difficult when a ‘closed’ recycle loop exists for 
PGM catalysts. However with increasing population 
and demands on PGMs for other applications, then the 
availability of supply could force the move towards non-
PGM catalysed reactions. In the meantime, the uptake 
of non-PGM catalysed reactions will likely be driven 
by either a corporate driver towards sustainability or 
because the reaction is more efficient than the PGM 
route. The ideal position would be to develop the ‘Suzuki’ 
reaction of the non-precious metal catalysts. Currently 
AstraZeneca has been successful with using copper 
in the Ullman reactions and there is room for further 
exploitation. Iron catalysts are another opportunity but 
are currently underexplored.
6.2.3. Faster development cycles
 
6.2.3.1. Predictive modelling
Predictive modelling will provide a more informed 
and successful catalysis design and will result in 
accelerated discovery, faster development times 
and less waste. This in turn would give a faster route 
to market and therefore an economic advantage. 
Predictive modelling can explore new experimental workspaces and find possibilities of new chemistries 
or solutions for challenging chemistries, for example, 
Taxol, an anti-cancer chemotherapy drug, that is 
difficult to manufacture at larger quantities59. Overall, 
this is a multiscale and multi-variant problem requiring 
optimisation covering from molecule to manufacture, 
which could lead to a more widespread adoption of 
catalysis by making them easier to use while ensuring 
catalysts are formulated and well characterised to 
support the requirements of quality by design (QbD).
To support advances in predictive modelling, the 
models need to be based on large datasets including 
both successful and failed/negative reaction results to 
generate a quantitative understanding and approach. 
From this a catalyst library can be generated to enable 
the development of a toolbox that can be used for 
modelling purposes, however, to develop this will require 
open data sharing agreements to be established. The 
outputs of this will be standardised and automated 
methodologies which will be able to harness the benefits 
of artificial intelligence (AI).
For modelling purposes there are often too many poorly 
defined variables with each catalyst having its own set of 
59 Expósito, O, M Bonfill, M Onribia, M H Mirjalili, R M Cusidó, and J Palazón. 2009. “Biotechnological Prodcution of Taxol and Related Taxoids: Current State and 
Prospects.” Anticancer Agents Med Chem 9 (1): 109-21.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology50optimised conditions. The scenario then becomes more 
complex when going beyond a single step and optimising 
an entire process. Some current issues are that more 
representative substrate challenges need to be defined 
along with the process constraints. In addition to this the 
automated software can have difficulties in differentiating 
between different metal catalysts. Furthermore, for 
reliable automated data the uptake of high throughput 
experimentation will need to be greater. 
Predictive modelling for different types of catalysts are 
at different stages of development. Heterogeneous 
catalysis has been developed the furthest, followed 
by homogeneous and then biocatalysis. The UK does 
have emergent data mining capabilities along with 
multiple modellers and there is reasonable activity 
occurring in academia, for example, the UK Catalysis 
Hub and UCL, with some collaborations with industry. 
More collaboration between industry and academia are 
needed to develop proof of concept. Projects of various 
lengths are needed to fit in with the required investment 
cycles of the pharmaceutical industry. To tackle the 
challenges will require a multiscale and multidisciplinary 
approach to modelling that is integrating molecular 
mechanisms with the engineering, for example, mass 
transfer and process design. As well as the modelling 
community, the array of skills required from both 
academia and industry includes synthetic organic 
chemists, data scientists/engineers, chemical/process 
engineers and system engineers.
6.2.3.2.  High throughput experimentation (HTE)
High throughput experimentation (HTE) enables quick 
learnings and the ability to fail fast and can therefore 
provide cost and time savings. HTE needs to be coupled 
with DoE (design of experiments) and other system 
approaches to ensure maximum benefits can be realised.
Chemo and biocatalysis have different HTE requirements 
and different experimental set-ups which will require 
expert knowledge and understanding to maximise its benefits. For biocatalysis there is equipment available to 
deal with high throughput automated systems, however, 
there is a lack of reproducibility and predictability when 
working with biological systems. Chemical catalysis 
equipment is available, but this can be expensive and is 
not always set up for immediate user requirements, for 
example, liquid handling can be too slow, and reactions 
can be difficult to access due to a closed set-up. General 
challenges exist around testing different temperatures, 
pressures, addition of solvents and solids. Other issues 
can be around sample taking, loss of solvents during 
the process and purification/cleanup of the catalyst. 
Also, achieving online analysis, especially for impurities 
is challenging for chemo catalysis especially when 
compared to biological reactions which are often 
linked to easy measurable reactions, for example, using 
fluorescence. Photocatalysis, especially photoredox, has 
challenges with data collection and analysis as there 
are limited screening capabilities and HTE challenges 
around flexible light intensity with a need to control the 
light intensity and internal temperature.
The UK does have HTE capabilities, for example, CPI, 
Liverpool (MIF), ROAR (Imperial), York, Liverpool and 
Bristol (TECS CDT). However, better process and system 
designs are needed which will require collaboration 
between the end users, chemists and data scientists. 
Easy to use and flexible equipment needs to be 
developed to serve user and experiment requirements, 
for example, high throughput immobilisation is needed 
for biocatalysis. Robust systems for online and real-
time measurements, for example, Raman for a 96 well 
plate and including analysers, are needed with data 
management and data analysis. Collating and being able 
to correctly interpret the data are vitally important.
HTE can meet the needs of different catalysis but with 
lots of bespoke systems and methodologies there is a 
need for standardisation and expansion of equipment 
capabilities. There are further requirements to improve 
the real-time data handling and analysis.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology516.3. Healthy ageing/pharma manufacturing 
conclusion
Catalysis is an essential and complex technology 
that will enable pharmaceuticals to be manufactured 
economically and will require additional focus and 
collaboration of multiple disciplines along the value 
chain to be able to provide new catalytic solutions 
and innovations. The pharmaceutical sector aspires 
to move towards smaller scale, agile and continuous 
manufacturing for the production of personalised 
medicines, this creates further demands for more 
efficient and selective catalytic performance when 
compared with the current larger scale batch processes. 
This will require the development of faster reactions with 
reduced impurities and by-products whilst minimising 
product work-up. Hybrid catalysis is at an early stage 
of development but will be an exciting technology 
option for the future. Beyond this the pharmaceutical 
industry is constantly exploring the chemical space, 
new catalysts will be an enabler to opening up new 
chemistries and with the continued shift in societal 
expectations then opportunities to explore non-PGM 
options could increase. Underpinning the use of 
catalysis in the pharmaceutical industry is the supporting 
technology that will enable faster development cycles 
and coupling HTE with predictive modelling could allow 
the experimental workspace to be explored faster whilst 
maximising the benefits from the data to develop better 
catalysts.
For all the areas of innovation noted here there is the 
opportunity to enable pre-competitive collaborations 
within a sector which is a UK strength. It would also 
be possible to drive pre-competitive collaborations 
with agrichemicals, flavours and fragrances to develop 
advances in continuous manufacturing, high throughput 
experimentation, predictive modelling and the use of 
non-PGM chemistries. Pre-competitive collaborative 
R&D across the sectors would combine skills and could 
leverage the difference in scale and catalyst volumes 
that the industries utilise. Therefore making it a more attractive option for catalyst manufacturers to support 
these industries and able to commit to the guaranteed supply that is required.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology52
7.1. Overview of UK academia
The UK has a strong academic base, with significant 
investment in researching into the different types of catalysis. In July 2108, EPSRC had over £60m invested in its catalysis research area portfolio including the investment into the UK Catalysis Hub
60. Figure 17 and 
Figure 18 show the key funded themes and sectors of the EPSRC catalysis research area. The catalysis research spans across multiple sectors and themes and highlights 
the reach of catalysis and that it is a key enabler. BBSRC, 
Innovate UK and EPSRC have also previously co-funded the Industrial Biotechnology Catalyst programme and invested approximately £75m into projects where a number of them would have relied upon biocatalysis. 
As an example of the UK’s academic focus on catalysis 
there is the EPSRC funded UK Catalysis Hub which is a consortium of universities active in catalysis research led by the universities of Cardiff, Bath and Manchester. It has 20 researchers at the central Harwell facilities with a direct academic network of 25 UK universities and over 45 involved in the wider network. Main areas of focus for the Catalysis hub are:
•opt imising, predicting and designing new catalysts;
•c atalysis at the water energy nexus;
•c atalysis for the circular economy and sustainable
manufacturing.
A sample of other UK institutes can be seen in Table 6 and a longer, yet non-exhaustive, list of academic institutes can be found in Appendix 1. From consultation with academia some examples of successful research areas from academia which are ready for translation to outside of academia are:
•a utonomous repair and remodelling of structural
composites;
•n ew polymers from CO 2, beyond polyurethanes
(styrene-butadiene-styrene);
•CO2/H2 direct to fuels and chemicals;
•G lycerol (biodiesel by-product) to H 2 and fuels.7.UK and international catalysis capability
60 E PSRC. 2018. EPSCR Portfolio Research Areas - Catalysis. June. https://epsrc.ukri.org/research/ourportfolio/researchareas/catalysis/.Energy Manufacturing 
the FuturePhysical 
Sciences
Engineering Non Theme 
SpecificHealthcare 
Technologies12%
64%5%
0%10%
9%
0%Figure 17:  
Proportional value 
assigned to EPSRC 
themes within the 
catalysis research area
Research 
Infrastrastructure
Chemicals Electronics Energy
Environment Food and Drink Healthcare
Information 
TechnologyManufacturing No sector relevance 
identified
Pharmaceuticals 
& BiotechnologyR&D Transport Systems 
and Vehicles
Water12%15%1%
13%29%
7%
0%Figure 18:  
Proportional value 
assigned to EPSRC 
themes within the 
catalysis research area
2%2%0%18%0% 1%
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology53

UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology54Table 6: Sample list of academic capabilities in the UK
UK academic institutions, facilities and networks
UK Catalysis Hub Heterogeneous, homogeneous, biocatalysis.
Diamond Light SourceAnalytical techniques for material characterisation and in-situ study of processes 
covering homogeneous, heterogeneous catalysis.
STFC (ISIS, Central Laser 
Facility)Analytical techniques for material characterisation and in-situ study of catalytic 
processes.
Biotechnology at University 
of ExeterChemical synthesis and catalysis
Manchester Institute of 
Biotechnology (MIB)Biocatalysis.
Cardiff University Heterogeneous, plasma, catalysis theory.
University of Bristol Homogeneous, synthesis, electrocatalysis and photocatalysis.
University of Oxford Synthesis, electrocatalysis and photocatalysis.
University of Cambridge Electrocatalysis and photocatalysis, catalysis theory.
UCL Heterogeneous, plasma, catalysis theory, enzymes, synbio.
The University of 
Manchester Heterogeneous, plasma, enzymes, synbio.
University of Nottingham Heterogeneous, plasma, enzymes, synbio.
University of Liverpool Homogeneous, heterogeneous, photo, electro-chemical and biocatalysis.
Imperial College London 
(including ROAR)Homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis. Chemical synthesis and analysis 
technologies.
Norwich Enzymes, synbio.
Criticat CDT Critical resource catalysis. Homogeneous, heterogeneous and biocatalysis.
University of Bath Heterogeneous, homogeneous, biocatalysis.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology557.2. Overview of UK national catalysis capabilities
The UK has several large and small manufacturers 
of catalysts with the most prominent being JM 
whose catalysis experience covers hetero, homo and 
biocatalysis for a vast array of industries including oil and 
gas, chemicals, pollution abatement, battery materials 
and pharmaceutical ingredients.61 Along with catalysis, 
JM have core capabilities in characterisation and 
modelling, chemical synthesis, electrochemistry, material 
design and engineering, PGM and specialist metallurgy, 
process optimisation, product formulation and surface 
chemistry and coatings62. This enables JM to cover 
the initial research through to the integrated catalytic 
process design and testing of the commercial real-world 
application of its catalysts. JM’s technologies are sold 
through direct sales and through the licensing of their 
technology. 
INEOS is a major company and significant user of 
catalysts. The organisation not only buys catalysts from 
other manufactures but also designs and develops its 
own catalysts to support the company’s production. In 
particular cases INEOS will also license the use of its 
catalysts to external companies for the production of 
petrochemicals, speciality chemicals and oil products.63
Examples of more catalyst manufacturers within the UK 
are Luxfer MEL Technologies that produce zirconium 
catalysts for industrial and automotive applications, CTL 
which makes titanium catalysts and zirconium cross 
linkers for polymer and oilfield applications, Molecular 
Products that makes a range of catalysts for breathable 
gas sorbents and Biocatalysts that manufactures 
enzymes for fine chemicals including pharmaceuticals, 
flavour and fragrances and food. Others include Stoli 
Catalysts, Eurocats, PQ Corporation, Ames Goldsmith, 
Sterling Pharma Ltd, PhosphonicS and Cleansorb which 
make catalysts for a range of applications (see also 
Appendix 1).64
Outside of the large catalyst manufacturers, the UK has 
limited capabilities to support the development, scale-
up and integrated process design of catalysts, there 
is however significant support in the area of industrial 
biotechnology followed by pharmaceuticals. As part 
of the UK governments, high-value manufacturing catapult, the Centre for Process Innovation (CPI) helps 
companies develop, prove, scale-up and commercialise 
new products and processes across the full range 
of chemical using industries. In catalysis, CPI’s core 
strength is biocatalysis and accelerating innovation 
from design through to demonstration scale. Outside 
of biocatalysis, CPI’s catalysis capability is limited, 
although it does have capabilities in high throughput 
experimentation that could be exploited further in the 
future. Also in the biocatalysis space are the capabilities 
of the Industrial Biotechnology Innovation Centre (IBioIC) 
and Biorenewables Development Centre (BDC) which 
supports the early scale of industrial biotechnology.
Beyond dedicated biocatalysis capability there is 
Drochaid Research Services with in-depth research 
and commercial knowledge covering homo, hetero and 
bio catalysis along with material science. As a contract 
research organisation Drochaid design, synthesis and 
characterise catalysts which are directly applicable to 
industry. Supporting the pharmaceutical industry is 
CatSci, a CRO that optimises design and development of 
catalysts. For advanced capabilities in characterisation, 
Finden, is an RTO that also provides expert analysis. 
There is also C-tech Innovation an RTO that has 
experience in electrochemistry.
The UK has a good baseline of catalysis capabilities in 
the UK for translating design to commercial projects, 
however it needs to be made stronger to make the 
technological advances necessary for domestic and 
international benefit. Current strengths are in catalyst 
design and manufacture and fine chemical (including 
pharmaceuticals) synthesis. 
7.3. International capability
Although the UK has a strong catalysis research base, 
other countries in Europe and the rest of the world are 
also leading in research and particularly its translation 
to industry. Key examples are the Fraunhofer’s (IGB, 
IMM, IKTS) which between them cover biocatalysis, 
electrocatalysis, chemocatalysis, and Sintef which covers 
homogeneous and heterogenous catalysis. A non-
exhaustive list of other international organisations working 
in the field of catalysis can be found in Appendix 2.
61 (Lynch 2020)
62 Johnson Matthey. n.d. Core Capabilites. Accessed May 29, 2020. https://matthey.com/en/inspiring-science/core-capabilities.
63 (Lynch 2020)
64 (Lynch 2020)
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology56Innovate UK sponsored visits to RealCAT, The CAT 
Catalytic Centre, CaRLa and VTT to specifically evaluate different approaches to industry-led research, and information on these organisations is below.
7.3.1. Examples of international academic capability
7.3.1.1. RealCat
RealCat is a government-funded, high throughput technology platform for catalyst design located at the University of Lille. The platform is a collaboration of three laboratories; the Unit of Catalysis and Solid State Chemistry (UCCS), Charles VIOLLETTE Institute (regional laboratory in food and biotechnology), and CRIStAL (research centre in computer science, signal and automatic control of Lille), and first went into operation in 2015. As an academic platform with 80% of its research linked to companies it has strong industry involvement and a focus on conducting industry-led research. RealCat uses a multidisciplinary approach for the design, synthesis, characterisation, scale-up and translation of heterogeneous, homogeneous, bio and hybrid catalysis, predominantly in the area of biorefineries. The platform includes robots for automated synthesis, rapid characterisation tools and both continuous and batch reactors.
RealCat utilises advanced high throughput 
experimentation (HTE) coupled with a digital strategy and data treatment which includes advanced statistical methodologies and informatics. This provides a fast and efficient screening strategy utilising customised high end vendor-supplied equipment. HTE can have a significant impact on the time involved to synthesise, characterise and test a catalyst and the RealCat platform has proven that an HTE approach can reduce timescales from 72 days to 6 days. Since RealCat has been operating, approximately 80% of the effort has been on biomass valorisation and biorefineries, however research and development can be conducted in other areas. RealCat fits within a larger framework for catalysis research that provides support from research through to scale-up of chemistries. A new platform called UpCat has been funded that will focus on catalysis shaping/forming, characterisation and testing of the shape/form to better support catalyst design and scale-up for real-world processes.To maintain a company focus, RealCat is ring-fenced from standard academic activities, for example, it does not fund PhDs, and has adopted a patent first then publish approach. The platform is open to projects of variable length but typically is not looking for three-year projects. This is for two reasons; firstly, the platform recognises that industry can require solutions within a fast turnaround. Secondly, due to the high throughput nature of the platform and the sheer volume of digital data captured, a series of shorter projects of even one-to-seven-days, can be encouraged to then allow time to analyse and extract value from the datasets produced.  
As the platform operates with the focus on industry the 
cost of access is assessed on a project by project basis and is dependent on the level of confidentiality required. RealCat as a platform typically seeks to maintain IP. When the research is based on a collaboration or partnership and there are mutually agreeable benefits to both parties, for example, IP ownership and the opportunity to publish, then this would provide more favourable terms of access than when it is used as a direct paid-for service with full confidentiality and different IP agreements. Academia within the associated universities also have to pay to use the platform. RealCat is government-funded but at the end of its current funding cycling it has the requirement to become self-sufficient.  
RealCat is fast, adaptive and responsive to industry 
requirements utilising HTE and data management. The platform fits within a wider ecosystem which supports catalyst research and scale-up activities. RealCat and the associated framework are an example of how the UK could support industry to, technologically and collaboratively, overcome the translational challenges from late-stage research. The data RealCat’s approach will generate can lead the way towards the digital design of catalysis. RealCat is a platform that would also be a good partner for UK organisations to consider. 
7.3.1.2.  C AT Catalytic Centre
The CAT Catalytic Centre is located at RWTH Aachen University and is a catalysis research centre based on a co-funded partnership between Covestro and RWTH Aachen University. Being a joint collaboration between a single company and a university conducting fundamental research it provides high levels of engagement and a 
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology57strong industry lead. As Covestro is the industrial partner 
the focus is on catalysis research, reaction engineering 
and the development of novel polymeric materials. This 
includes catalysts for CO 2 based polymers, synthesis 
of sustainable building blocks for polymers, novel high 
performance materials, multifunctional molecules and 
tailor-made catalysts. 
With a common interest in sustainability and carbon 
dioxide utilisation RWTH Aachen University and Covestro 
(formerly Bayer) established the centre 12 years ago and 
the current agreement extends to 2024. Covestro wants 
to utilise CO 2 as sustainable feedstock for polyurethane 
production and the company recognises the strategic 
relevance of investing in early-stage research that it could 
lead and direct. Both parties believe in the purpose and 
the advantage of the centre and so there is a mutually 
beneficial relationship with an agreement around the 
balance of patenting versus publishing. Part of the 
agreement between the organisations is that there is 
50% ownership of any IP generated with the option for 
buy-out from Covestro if it is commercially successful. 
The structure of the CAT Catalytic Centre means that 
the work conducted is exclusively for Covestro with 
dedicated equipment and lab space for the research. A 
key output of this collaboration has been that 20-30% 
of projects conducted have gone on to further process 
development and commercialisation.  
Although the structure of the CAT Catalytic Centre is 
unlikely to be something that can be directly replicated 
in the UK there are some interesting observations. The 
centre highlights the need for strong industry-focused 
research with robust relationships and an accepted 
approach around patenting versus publishing, that is, 
patent first then publish, that balances the requirements 
of both the academic and industrial partner. This has led 
to the successful translation of research into industry via 
Covestro process development which also highlights the 
need for known routes for progressing further catalyst 
development before reaching commercial scale.
7.3.1.3. CaRLa
CaRLa is the Catalysis Research Laboratory situated 
in Heidelberg and is an industry partnership between 
BASF and the University of Heidelberg. The lab is 
led by BASF which provides a strong industry focus. 
Projects are industrially relevant problems for BASF covering transition metal based homogenous catalysis, 
where traditional academic focus is rare. Other areas 
of focus include photochemistry, oxidations, amination, 
hydrogenation, hydroformylation, CO 2 chemistry, 
quantum chemistry and modelling.
This was BASF’s first satellite lab. Established in 2006 
it originally received government funding and is now 
based on a partnership between the two organisations 
with BASF providing 70% of the funding. CaRLa’s has 
produced 84 publications, 29 patent applications and 
since 2015, 11 projects have been further developed by 
BASF. The partnership has recently been renewed for 
three years until 2022. For BASF, CaRLa fits under the 
homogenous catalysis group which provides the ideas 
and direction for the research conducted. It is a modest 
lab that has a permanent onsite BASF management 
presence and houses eight post doctorates. CaRLa is 
focused on early-stage research of relevance to BASF 
only and is not looking to conduct short projects with 
both custom synthesis and pure screening projects being 
out of scope. The research should be of high academic 
interest and projects require a deep mechanistic 
understanding of catalyst design, if a project is not 
progressing well then it will be stopped early. The group 
also looks for practical solutions, not just creative and 
novel ones. Both parties have agreed to an IP sharing 
arrangement and there is agreement to patent then 
publish. The position of the lab ensures it is separate 
from daily BASF research and manufacturing activities, 
yet close enough to allow swift transfer of successful 
research and technology into BASF for further process 
development. 
Similarly to the CAT Catalytic Centre the structure of 
CaRLa is something that the UK is unlikely to be able 
to adopt, however, there are still some things that the 
UK should consider. CaRLa demonstrates that there 
is a need for industry engagement in relevant early 
stage research and there is benefit in having a mutual, 
open and strong relationship working collaboratively on 
projects that deliver benefit for all parties. This requires 
an accepted balance of patenting and publishing with a 
patent first then publishing approach. For CaRLa there 
is a known route for successful projects, that is, they are 
taken inhouse into BASF’s group for further research and 
development, this again highlights the need for further 
requirements in the upscaling of catalysts. 
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology58The UK has a range of 
companies, large and 
small, that can manufacture 
catalysts and additional 
companies that support 
research and development 
and scale-up of catalysts. 
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology597.3.2. Example of international RTO capabilities
7.3.2.1.  VTT
VTT is an RTO based across numerous sites in Finland 
with research, development and scale-up capability and leverages strong industry involvement. The organisation is part of Finland’s innovation system and operates under the mandate of the Ministry of Employment and Economy. VTT has a model similar to the Fraunhofer model with a mixture of government, grant and private funding and although still owned by and reporting to the government it is now able to steer its own research interests which include bioeconomy and circular economy, health and wellbeing, digital society, low carbon energy, smart industry, sustainable and smart city. As an RTO of over 2,000 people, the services they cover includes technology and business foresight, strategic research, product and service development, IPR and licensing, technology and innovation management. Direct contract research with global industry counts for more than a third of VTT’s activities. 
In the area of clean growth VTT have significant 
experience and specialise in heterogeneous catalysts for SMR, gas ultra-cleaning, catalytic partial oxidation, methanation and Fischer-Tropsch utilising small to medium scale reactors. Catalysis is seen as an enabling technology and VTT has the capability to screen and develop new catalysts for new applications and the systems they are developing. Building on their expertise in heterogeneous catalysis research they have also focused on developing flexible pilot and demonstration scale plants with the ability to conduct gasification, fast pyrolysis, catalytic tar treatment, syngas ultra-purification, and Fischer-Tropsch enabling them to conduct power-to-x, biomass and CCU trials on real feedstocks to produce an end product. VTT also has a mobile unit that can be transported and connected to real processes for testing. This gives VTT a flexible approach with systems that can be modified for different activities. 
The FT process can scale from lab to pilot and the 
facility can be used for jet fuel, car fuel or chemicals, for example, aromatics, olefins and ethanol. Fast pyrolysis, both thermal and catalytic, can be utilised to make products like bio-oil, and can be taken from lab to pilot scale and integrated with other technologies. VTT themselves approach the pilot plant with a view to the entire process and system to design alongside considering commercial and economically viable solutions. Therefore, at pilot/demonstration scale it is about more than just the catalyst, albeit it remains an important underpinning part of the solution. Projects begin with the complete system in mind and with the identification of business needs around an available feedstock or a target product. In this area, VTT has a significant amount of learning around early stage catalyst research and its translation to larger scale therefore helping to de-risk and scale-up. In other parts of VTT they have expertise in fine and specialty chemicals with synthesis and scale-up utilising modern catalyst technology in organic synthesis. The organisation also has capabilities in biocatalysis and fermentation.
As an organisation, VTT actively encourages the 
generation and ownership of patents to provide additional funding through the selling or licensing of IP.  They have 1,368 patents and 363 patent families. The organisation continues to have a long term portfolio approach and are looking for the next opportunities in order to continue building its portfolio, for example, syngas to methanol and also syngas hydrogen to ammonia. 
VTT is a large RTO that has had a long time to learn and 
develop in-depth knowledge and skill in key areas. It is the skill, experience and long term vision of the organisation coupled with its equipment that makes it a good example of what it takes to translate catalysis research to demonstration scale. VTT would be a good organisation for collaborative interaction with UK academia and industry. Within the UK there is a gap in the capability available for pilot and demonstration scale facilities to enable the evaluation of the commercial viability of a complete system from a real feedstock to product.
7.4. Catalysis capability conclusions 
The market demand and catalyst capabilities currently in the UK are mostly centred around heterogeneous catalysts.  However the UK does have increasing capabilities in homogeneous and biocatalysis.  
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology60
Figure 19: UK Catalyst and Process Design Capability
Catalyst Design
Catalyst design, synthesis, 
characterisation and testing
Biocatalyst discovery, screening 
and expressionCatalytic process design 
and integration
Process and reactor design
Catalyst upscaling (for example, 
forming, characterisation and testing)Pilot and demonstration 
scaling testingCatalyst Manufacturer*JM
Ames Goldsmith
Stoli
PQ Corp
Luxfer
CTL
Cleansorb
PhosphonicS
Biocatalysts
Prozomix
Sterling Pharma
Econic
Magma CeramicsAcademic Network*IPRD
DMU
ManchesterCatalysis Hub
Cardiff/CTI, CSTC/Bath, Manchester, QUB, 
Bristol, Oxford, Cambridge, Bradford, Leicester, 
Aston, Durham, Aberdeen, Newcastle, York, UCL, Nottingham, Liverpool, Imperial College London/ ROAR, Norwich, Glasgow, Leeds/IPRD, Swansea, Southampton, Birmingham, Sheffield, Warwick, London South Bank, Edinburgh, St Andrews, Heriot Watt, DMURTO*CPI (Bio)
CatSci (Pharma)
BDC (Bio) DrochaidCatalyst Users*Ineos* (also a manufacture of own Catalysts with some licensed)
BP
Croda Strata AZ Sabic
Carbon Capture Solutions GSK P&G
BASF
Unilever
*non-exhaustive list for illustrative purposesFinden Finden
ISIS/Diamond IBioIC (Bio) ISIS/Diamond C-tech (electro)Increase capability and expertise to cover 
catalytic process design and integration 
through to pilot and demonstration scale
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology61Figure 19 shows the UK catalysis capability covering 
design/discovery, upscaling, pilot and demonstration 
scale. UK catalysis has benefited from a sizable amount 
of investment into the UK’s academic catalysis capability 
which often has a reasonable level of industry support. 
However, industry’s involvement to collaborate on the 
translation of research beyond academia is weaker. The 
UK has a range of companies, large and small, that can 
manufacture catalysts and additional companies that 
support research and development and scale-up of 
catalysts. 
Figure 19 shows that the UK’s current position needs 
to be made stronger to translate catalysis design 
from research to commercialisation so it can leverage 
technological advances for domestic and international 
benefit.  For the UK to take a leading position in catalysis 
technology for fine chemicals synthesis, the hydrogen 
economy, CCUS and waste valorisation, then it needs 
to strengthen its open access capabilities and expertise 
in the upscaling of catalysts and the integrated catalytic 
process design at pilot and demonstration-scale. As part 
of strengthening capabilities there is a need to ensure 
the use of deep knowledge and understanding of the 
industrial use of catalysts. 
Comparing models of other catalysis centres (VTT, 
RealCat, CAT Catalytic Centre, CaRLa) highlights that 
catalyst is recognised as an important and valuable 
underpinning technology. This is emphasised by BASF 
and Covestro both identifying the need to specifically 
fund CaRLa and the CAT Catalytic Centre respectively. 
Both CaRLa and the CAT Catalytic centre focus on early stage research with both BASF and Covestro having 
their own inhouse process development capabilities 
for further translation. Many chemical manufacturers 
in the UK would not have this type of in-house catalysis 
development capability and there is a gap in the UK’s 
translational capabilities. All centres showed a long 
term strategic focus on developing industry-led catalysis 
research and development and the importance of 
strong relationships and collaboration. As a result of an 
industry-led approach, all centres had recognised the 
need to patent first then publish and have agreed win-
win approaches between the industrial and academic/
research partner. RealCat and the future platform of 
UpCat showed the importance of high throughput 
experimentation, digitisation and the need for industry 
process development in catalysis characteristics and 
the subsequent upscaling, for example, including shape 
and form. VTT brings to the foreground the need for 
upscaling, pilot and demonstration capabilities that 
utilise a systems approach to catalysis based on real 
world feedstocks and products.
Both VTT and RealCat are excellent opportunities for 
collaboration.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology62

UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology638.1. Market opportunity 
The global catalyst industry is worth $34.1bn and enables the delivery of $15tn to downstream markets. This is expected to grow to 2025 at a CAGR of 4.3% per annum. The UK catalyst market is worth $433m catalysis consumption and $188bn of revenue which is directly enabled by catalysts in the downstream markets.
Figure 20 shows the market areas for innovation and 
growth for catalysis. Based on market analysis, fine chemicals are predicted to be the area for higher growth in the UK on its current trajectory and those labelled 1–4 indicate the areas of highest innovation with the potential for driving higher growth.
The UK has a smaller catalyst market when compared to 
other countries, but it will still be greater than $500m by 2025. This will drive accrued benefit in the downstream sectors and generate greater value for the UK economy. The UK will need to stimulate increasing domestic demand in new and growing UK markets, for example, in the areas of hydrogen and fine chemicals, both of which will need new catalysts. In the area of fine chemicals there is an opportunity to support this leading sector to 8.UK Catalysis conclusions
Figure 20: UK market areas for innovation and growth
Virgin 
bio-based 
feedstocks to 
chemicals
Environment
Automotive catalysts, 
fuel cells, air and 
water treatmentCCUS to chemicals
Carbon capture 
utilisation and 
storageNew high 
functionality 
Polymer & Rubber
High functionality, 
new materialsCarbon Efficiency
Crude oil to chemicals 
(COTC), coal to 
chemicals (CTC),  
gas to chemicals  
(GTC)
Fine Chemicals
Agrichemicals, flavours 
and fragrances, 
pharmaceuticalsLow Carbon 
Hydrogen
Green and 
blue H 2
Waste (inc 
biomass & 
polymers) to 
ChemicalsAll  Catalyst &  
Process Design
General, structured 
catalysts, catalyst 
reactor design41
2
3
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology64ensure it maintains its leading and competitive edge in 
the catalyst market. For clean growth, hydrogen coupled with CCU is the largest opportunity for creating new catalysts in the UK.
8.2. Driving value for the UK today
Catalysis is complex and is a critical and enabling key technology for the chemical industry. Making catalysis work in real processes and to ensure market success will require a mix of skills working in collaboration along the value chain. Accelerating innovation will provide the benefits of delivering new process and products and an increase in UK productivity. These advances in catalysis innovation can support the nation’s Grand Challenges especially clean growth and healthy ageing. For clean growth the UK should strategically focus on areas of increasing domestic demand such as hydrogen, CCUS and waste valorisation. In the area of healthy ageing and pharmaceutical manufacturing, catalysis can enable access to new chemistries and smarter manufacturing processes. Overall, catalysis is an enabling technology that will help the shift towards net zero and innovation will enable faster prediction, testing and scale-up of new catalysts for real industrial systems. 
For the acceleration of catalysis innovation, a systems 
approach is needed that incorporates the supply chain and considers the real-world application and operating conditions of each process step from feedstock to final product. Therefore catalysts need to be designed, scaled and engineered to deliver commercial value by working on the right problem at the right time. However, for companies developing end to end processes it is not always clear what role innovation in catalysis can play. With a gap in capabilities for catalysis upscaling and pilot/demonstration scale testing then these companies can struggle to demonstrate the viability of their processes. Access to catalyst capabilities is needed where there is an industry-led approach to solving problems in a timeframe to suit business needs while also providing the right balance between patenting and publishing.  Projects in the clean growth space should also evaluate the environmental impact and consider full life cycle analysis. For all the sectors where catalysis can be an enabler the role of regulation and policy coupled with public perception will also need to be considered when evaluating solutions. Catalyst design and upscaling can have long development times which requires industry led collaborative working. During design and upscaling it is important to consider the reaction and process engineering associated with full scale production and to balance catalyst selectivity with process conversion and yields. Other factors to be considered are:
•le vels of impurities and by-products and the impact on
the overall process;
•f eedstock and end product specifications;
•t he catalyst’s lifecycle including its overall toxicity,
the tolerance to poisoning, its structural andkinetic robustness, its regeneration and end-of-liferequirements.
To improve catalyst design and upscaling timeframes then accelerating the uptake of high throughput experimentation and advancing the development of predictive modelling can provide the faster development cycles. 
For the clean growth challenge, it will be crucial for the 
UK to remain globally competitive as sectors become more energy-efficient and reduce greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 2050. Catalysis will be an enabling key technology to be developed that will contribute to the required reductions whilst maintaining the production of competitive chemicals. 
•Hydrogen
Lo w carbon hydrogen is one of the largest catalyst
innovation opportunities for the UK with two mainoptions being electrolysis or novel reforming. Howeverto make low carbon hydrogen economically viable itneeds to be coupled with CCU capabilities.
•CO2 Utilisation
A s ystems approach is required when considering
CCU. It needs to be coupled with hydrogen andrenewable energy in industrial clusters where thecarbon and energy balance matches thermodynamicand commercial needs. Catalyst technology for theproduction of fuels exists but is not economicallyviable. For chemicals there are a lot of research optionsand it will require collaborative working and a systemsapproach to determine the commercially viable routesthat can utilise the large volume of CO 2 emitted.  A
challenge for catalysis is understanding the assayof real-life flue gases and the impact on the catalystperformance.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology65•W aste to chemicals and fuels
U sing waste (MSW, biomass, polymers) in the
production of syngas and subsequently chemicals and
fuels is another key catalysis opportunity for the UK.Biotechnology and biogas are UK strengths that can beleveraged for this purpose. Environmental and socialresponsibility is also driving the recycling of polymersto make higher-value products. This is an area wherethere is considerable industry and academic focus, forexample, utilising pyrolysis or hydrocracking. Advancesin this area for both bulk and niche applications can beleveraged with collaborative R&D.
I n the area of clean growth it is important to have
collaborative R&D and access to catalysis expertiseand capability in design and upscaling.  There isalso a need for pilot scale and demonstration testingcapabilities to optimise the process and provide robustkinetic data proving consistent quality prior to movingto full-scale production.
In the area of healthy ageing and pharmaceutical manufacturing there are opportunities to encourage pre-competitive collaborations within a sector which is a UK strength. Catalysis can be an enabler for advances in continuous/pseudo continuous manufacturing and gaining access to new chemistries. Advances in high throughput experimentation and predictive modelling of catalysis can lead to faster development cycles of catalyst design and development which could be leveraged by other industries. Pre-competitive collaborations could occur with the agrichemicals, flavours and fragrances sectors to increase the uptake of technologies. 
The opportunity for catalysis in the UK is significant and 
it will require a range of different organisations along the supply chains and across sectors working collaboratively. To achieve a difference there is a requirement to have access to impartial yet commercially relevant knowledge and capability. Overall there is a need to develop optimised techno-economic solutions that evaluate a whole system to define a commercially viable catalytic solution. Commercial value will be derived from direct catalyst manufacture while also driving additional value from the products made by the downstream sectors manufacturing with the catalysts. Additional value will also be gained from the domestic and international licensing of the technology and the processes.
8.3. UK Capabilities
The UK has a strong academic capability in catalysis research and development and has been supported by significant investment. For catalyst manufacturers the UK is in a reasonable position, most notably, with Johnson Matthey having a wide portfolio covering chemicals to environmental catalysts. There is also an array of other large and small companies in the UK producing catalysts for a range of industries, also see Figure 19. The UK also has a selection of companies that support catalyst R&D, but this is stronger in biocatalysis. Hence, within the UK there is a need to support and strengthen the capabilities for open access, industry led catalyst design, upscaling and pilot and demonstration testing. There is also a need to advance capabilities in supporting technologies that speed up catalyst design, development and upscaling, for example, high throughput experimentation coupled with predictive modelling. Further benefit can be derived from industry-led collaborations between all parties along the supply chain. Adopting an integrated, collaborative, multidisciplinary and holistic systems approach can ensure market pull and enable the best translation of catalytic innovations. 
To leverage future catalysis opportunities in fine 
chemicals, the hydrogen economy, CCUS and waste valorisation then the UK should increase its open access capability and expertise in catalyst upscaling through to demonstration scale. There is also an opportunity to strengthen the open capabilities and technologies available for industry-led catalyst design.
8.4. Recommendations for catalysis innovation 
support Catalysis is a key underpinning and enabling technology requiring investment to support the acceleration of innovation to enable technologies that help deliver on the Grand Challenges of clean growth and healthy ageing. Support is required for the faster design and upscaling of catalysts alongside programmes that accelerate innovation and technology adoption. Catalysis innovation in clean growth is vitally important for the UK in the areas of hydrogen, CCU-to-chemicals and waste-to-chemicals. For healthy ageing/pharmaceutical manufacturing 
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology66the importance of catalysis is to enable smarter 
manufacturing, provide access to new chemistries and faster development cycles. The recommendation is for funding investment to provide:
•A ccess to UK catalysis capabilities.
•C ollaborative research and development (cR&D).
•C atalysis funding to support Grand Challenges/
net zero.
•C lean growth demonstrator projects.
•E xpansion of UK catalysis capabilities.
8.4.1. Access to UK catalysis capabilitiesFunding aims are to:
•I ncrease company access to current open access and
impartial facilities.
•E nable access to capabilities in Europe, for example,
RealCat, if no UK capability exists and providing theproject’s output are for the UK’s benefit.
•S olve industry-led and owned problems within
appropriate timescales and with appropriate levelsof confidentiality. Projects should solve an industryproblem and the funding does not cover fundamentalresearch.
•P rovide industry access to equipment and knowledge
at a reasonable cost.There is significant knowledge of catalysis across universities and other facilities. However, it is not always accessible to companies who may not have a direct interest in catalysis, this results in reduced translation of research into a commercial environment. This programme would lower the barrier to entry and allow companies access to impartial and world leading catalysis expertise for industrial projects with short to medium timelines. It would provide an opportunity for companies to evaluate their interest in catalysis. Funding would answer specific questions about the design, assessment, testing, analysis or upscaling of catalysts. Knowledge exchange would be encouraged to allow for the upskilling of companies personnel. The impact would be to increase the translation of research into commercial applications and would lead to higher adoption of catalytic processes in a range of applications. Beneficial outputs would be an increase in process efficiency and productivity, reduced energy consumption and improved sustainability of processes. 
8.4.2. Collaborative research and development 
(cR&D)Catalysis funding to support grand challenges/net zeroFunding aims to:
•P rovide ring-fenced cR&D catalysis funding to

UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology67accelerate adoption of catalytic processes across the 
grand challenges.
•A dopt a portfolio approach, with funding available to
support industry-led catalysis projects which supportGrand Challenges.
•O vercome the issue that catalysis as a critical enabler
for many processes can be overlooked in many of theGrand Challenges.
•P rovide brokerage and networking to develop project
consortia.
•E nsure a systems approach by having collaborations
that include the supply chain.
Throughout this project the importance of catalysis within a large number of processes has been identified. As the production of chemicals and materials becomes more sustainable catalysis is likely to play an increased role. The project has also identified the need for catalysis development to be incorporated into the process/system design and development. As such, a need for a cR&D catalysis funding has been identified. Calls must align to active programmes of work where catalysis can act as an enabling technology with the potential to unlock new opportunities, for example, clean growth and medicines manufacturing. A portfolio approach should be used to ensure prioritisation towards the biggest catalysis opportunities that accelerating innovation could solve, for example, net zero. In this way catalytic processes can be developed and will play a significant role in resolving the Grand Challenges by accelerating the deployment of catalytic technologies. 
8.4.3. Clean growth demonstrator projects
Funding aims to:
•P rovide companies with access to existing clean
growth demonstrator projects in the UK or Europe, forexample, VTT.
•E valuate the potential to co-fund with existing or future
funding streams to maximise potential impact and scale of delivery e.g. IDC, TFI.
Companies and especially SMEs require access to demonstration-scale equipment to further develop processes. In particular there is a need to develop complete systems and processes around alternative feedstocks to enable the decarbonisation of the chemicals and materials sectors, for example, plastic waste, biomass, H 2 and CO 2 to chemicals. If the 
programme can be co-funded with other initiatives, then there are opportunities to have a bigger impact with large 

UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology68whole system projects. With the UK having limited open 
access and impartial demonstrator capability then the funding should allow cR&D projects to access existing facilities in the UK or Europe to demonstrate clean growth processes. This would accelerate the commercial deployment of clean growth technologies that support industrial decarbonisation by initially demonstrating processes and subsequently deploying successful technologies. 
8.4.4. Expansion of UK catalysis capabilities
Funding aims to:
•E xtend current UK catalysis capability to provide
impartial open access and industry-led upscaling ofcatalysts.
•E xtend current UK capability in technology that
enables fast catalyst development cycles.
•S upport an increase in industry-led, open access
catalysis design and synthesis.
•P rovide new open access, industry led, flexible pilot
scale and demonstration facilities for clean growth.
To continue to provide companies without a direct interest in catalysis the support that is needed to translate new innovations into a commercial environment then the existing UK catalysis capability should be extended. The access to leading expertise needs to cover the upscaling of catalyst which incorporates the prototyping of the reactor and process design. Technologies that enable faster catalyst development, such as high throughput experimentation, data management and analysis and predictive modelling for all catalysis will also be a critical requirement. The possibility to support an increase in open access and impartial expert knowledge and capability in catalysis design and synthesis would also provide more options for companies to solve problems in all the different types of catalysis. Funding for capital investment for companies to demonstrate their clean growth processes at an appropriate scale is needed to accelerate the commercial deployment of clean growth technologies. The expansion and integration of these capabilities will support the UK’s position and provide companies with the ability to fast track innovation in catalysis and solve commercial problems.
8.5. Closing remarks
For the UK’s chemical using industry to remain globally competitive and able to support the delivery of the UK’s Grand Challenges and net zero, catalysis is a vital, enabling technology. Catalysis has a global market of $34.1bn and drives progress and innovation delivering over $15tn. While the UK has a catalysis market of $433m it drives the delivery of $188bn in downstream sectors. The acceleration of catalysis innovation should be supported in key areas of importance and strength for the UK domestically which can be exploited internationally, delivering increased productivity and value.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology69The funding for the expansion of UK 
catalysis capabilities aims to: 
•E xtend current UK catalysis capability
to provide impartial open access andindustry-led upscaling of catalysts.
•E xtend current UK capability in
technology that enables fast catalystdevelopment cycles.
•S upport an increase in industry-led,
open access catalysis design andsynthesis.
•P rovide new open access, industry led,
flexible pilot scale and demonstrationfacilities for clean growth.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology709.1. Appendix 1:  Examples of UK capabilities
9.1.1. Examples of UK industrial catalysis capabilities (non exhaustive)9.Appendices
Non-exhaustive example list of companies with catalysis capabilities
JM PhosphonicS
Ames Goldsmith Biocatalysts
Stoli Sterling Pharma
PQ Corp Magma Ceramics
Luxfer Cleansorb
CTL Prozomix
Non-exhaustive example list of RTOs with catalysis capabilities CPI (Biocatalysis) IBioIC
Drochaid CatSci
Finden C-tech (electrochemistry)
9.1.2. Examples of UK academic capabilities (non exhaustive)
Non-exhaustive example list of academia with catalysis capabilities
University of YorkThe University of Manchester (including EPSRC CDT in 
Integrated Catalysis)
University of Cardiff University of Nottingham
UK Catalysis Hub University of Liverpool
Diamond Light Source Imperial College London (including ROAR)
STFC (ISIS, Central Laser Facility) Norwich
Dial-a-Molecule Grand Challenge Network EaSI-CAT/CRITICAT CDT
Biotechnology at University of ExeterCentre for Sustainable Technology CDT, University of Bath
Manchester Institute of Biotechnology (MIB) University of Glasgow
University of Bristol University of Leeds
University of Oxford Swansea University
University of Cambridge University of Southampton
Queen’s University Belfast Birmingham University
University of Bradford Sheffield University
University of Leicester Warwick University
Aston University Southampton University
University of Bath London South Bank University
Durham University Heriot Watt University
Aberdeen University St Andrews University
University of Newcastle Edinburgh University
University College London De Montfort University
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology719.2. Appendix 2:  Additional international capabilities
9.2.1. Examples of international organisation capabilities (non exhaustive)
Examples of companies can be seen by looking at the members of the EU Clusters on Catalysis project65:
Cascat GmbH, Germany Studio di Consulenza Scientifica (SCSOP), Italy
DexLeChem GmbH, Germany Avantium, The Netherlands
Umicore AG&Co KG, Germany DSM Ahead R&D bv, The Netherlands
eni S.p.A. – Research & Technological Innovation 
Department – Downstream Process Technologies, ItalyOrrion Chemical Metalchen, France
Repsol, Spain
Solvay, Belgium
Examples of Catalysis RTO’s, institutes and associations can be seen by looking at the members of the EU Clusters 
on Catalysis project66:
CNR Istituto di Chimica dei Composti Organometallici 
(CNR-ICCOM), ItalyCentro Singular de Investigación en Química Biolóxica e 
Materiais Molecula-res (CiQUS), Spain
CNR Istituto di Chimica della Materia Condensata e di 
Tecnologie per l’Energia (CNR-ICMATE), ItalyIMDEA Energy Institute, Spain
CNR Istituto per i Processi Chimico-Fisici (CNR-IPCF), 
ItalyInstitute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ), Spain
CNR Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie Molecolari (CNR-
ISTM), ItalyInstituto de Catálisis y Petroleoquímica, CSIC (ICP), Spain
CNR Istituto per lo Studio dei Materiali Nanostrutturati 
(CNR-ISMN), ItalyTecnalia, Spain
CNR Istituto per la Tecnologia delle Membrane (CNR-
ITM), ItalyCNRS Institut de recherches sur la catalyse et 
l’environnement de Lyon (CNRS-IRCEL YON), France
Italian Catalysis Society (GIC) of the Italian Chemical 
Society (SCI), ItalyCNRS Unite de catalyse et Chimie du solide (CNRS-
UCCS), France
Consorzio Interuniversitario Nazionale per la Scienza e 
Tecnologia dei Materiali (INSTM), ItalyCommissariat à l’énergie atomique et aux énergies 
alternatives (CEA), France
DECHEMA e.V. (German Society for Chemical 
Engineering and Biotechnology), GermanyEuropean Materials Research Society (EMRS), France
European Nanoporous Materials Institute of Excellence 
(ENMIX), GermanyEuropean Association for Chemical and Molecular 
Sciences (EuCheMS), Belgium
European Research Institute of Catalysis (ERIC Aisbl), 
BelgiumSusChem (European Technology Platform for 
Sustainable Chemistry) Belgium
Exzellenzcluster UNICAT, Berlin, Germany European Chemical Industry Council (CEFIC), Belgium
Forschungszentrum Jülich (FZJ), Germany EUROKIN, The Netherlands
Fritz-Haber-Institute of the Max-Planck Society (FHI-
MPG), GermanyNetherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO), 
The Netherlands
German Catalysis Society (GeCatS), Germany Heyrovsky Institute of Physical Chemistry, Czech 
Academy of Sciences, Czech Republic
Karlsruher Institut für Technologie (KIT), Germany Jerzy-Haber-Institute of Catalysis and Surface Chemistry, 
Polish Academy of Sciences, Poland
Catalonia Institute for Energy Research (IREC), Spain National Institute of Chemistry (NIC), Slovenia
Center for Research in Sustainable Chemistry (CIQSO), 
SpainNational Centre of Scientific Research (NCSR) 
‘Demokritos’, Greece
SINTEF Materials and Chemistry, Norway
65 European Clusters on Catalysis. n.d. Cluster Participants. Accessed May 2020. http://www.catalysiscluster.eu/cluster-participants-2/.
66 European Clusters on Catalysis n.d.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology72Others RTOs, institutes and associations (non-exhaustive)
Fraunhofer IGB, Germany Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL)/Institute 
for Integrated Catalysis (IIC), USAFraunhofer IMM, Germany
Fraunhofer IKTS, GermanyVTT, Finland
9.2.2. Examples of international academic capabilities 
(non exhaustive)Catalysis is prevalent in numerous international universities; below are some further examples of international academic capabilities. For a small selection there is a brief snapshot of the areas of research focus. 
Leibniz Institute for Catalysis (Germany) 
•Applie d sustainable catalytic processes
(homogeneous, heterogeneous, renewable resources).
Innovative methods and technologies in catalysis(in situ studies, discovery and reaction engineering,heterogeneous photocatalysis). Special (metal)organic syntheses and catalyses (coordination chemand catalysis, hydrogenation and hydro-formulation,bio-inspired and heterogeneous catalysis, polymerchemistry and catalysis, materials design, catalysisand organic synthesis, catalytic cycloadditions). Smallmolecule activation. Catalytic functionalisation. 
67
Netherlands Institute for Catalysis Research (NIOK) (Netherlands)
•Bio catalysis, heterogeneous catalysis and sustainable
chemistry, homogeneous, supramolecular and bio-inspired catalysis, industrial sustainable chemistry,synthetic organic chemistry. Created Dutch catalysisRoadmap.
68
Institute of Catalysis Research and Technology (IKFT) (Germany)
•‘The Institut e of Catalysis Research and Technology
was founded 2011. Its mission is to bridge the gapbetween fundamental and applied research and thedevelopment of new technologies and products in thefield of catalysis and process technology of catalysedprocesses. The focus of work is in the sustainableutilisation of alternative feedstocks and their conversioninto energy carriers intermediates. This includesthe development of new catalytic systems basedon a fundamental understanding of processes on a molecular level’.
69 
Boreskov Institute of Catalysis (Russia)
•‘R efinery and petrochemistry. Utilisation of non-
traditional feedstock (including natural gas, coal andrenewable organic feedstock) for synthesis of chemicals,liquid motor fuels and chemical energy carriers.Synthesis of semiproducts and monomers for organicand fine synthesis; synthesis of polymer materials.Large-scale synthesis of chemicals and fertilizers.Pharmaceutical industry: synthesis of drugs, vitamins,plant-protecting agents and other kinds of biologicallyactive substances. Environmental protection includingindustrial and motor waste treatment. Cutting-edgetechnologies for ecologically sound and self-containedpower systems and for utilization of non-traditional andrenewable energy sources’.
70
Institute of Research on Catalysis and Environment (France)
•‘Ca talysis for energy, the environment and reuse
of bioresources by researching model molecules,studying the transformation of complex environments,developing processes and reactors and understandingthe degradation and dispersion of pollutants. Researchteams include integrated thermodynamics, analyticaland reaction approaches, characterization andremediation of pollutants in air and water, sustainablechemistry from fundamentals to application, Energyfuels and intermediaries for sustainable development,engineering from material to reactor’.
71
TU Munich Catalysis Research Center (Germany)
•Mo delling, ORR catalysts, metal oxide catalysts.72
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
67 L eibniz Institute for Catalysis. n.d. Leibniz Institute for Catalysis. Accessed May 2020. https://www.catalysis.de/en/home/.
68 NI OK. n.d. NIOK. Accessed May 2020. https://niok.nl/.
69  I nstitute of Catalysis Research and Technology (IKFT). n.d. Institute of Catalysis Research and Technology (IKFT). Accessed 2020. https://www.ikft.kit.edu/
english/index.php#:~:text=The%20Institute%20of%20Catalysis%20Research,process%20technology%20of%20catalyzed%20processes.
70 B oreskov Institute of Catalysis. n.d. Boreskov Institute of Catalysis. Accessed May 2020. http://www.en.catalysis.ru/block/index.php?ID=22.
71 I nstitut de recherches sur la catalyse et l’environnement de Lyon. n.d. Institut de recherches sur la catalyse et l’environnement de Lyon. Accessed May 2020. 
https://www.ircelyon.univ-lyon1.fr/en/welcome-2/.
72 C atalysis Research Center Technical University of Munich. n.d. Catalysis Research Center Technical University of Munich. Accessed May 2020.  
https://www.crc.tum.de/en/home/.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology73Further examples of international academic capabilities can be seen by again looking at the members of the EU 
Clusters on Catalysis project73:
Politecnico di Milano, Italy Universitatea din Bucureşti, Romania
Politecnico di Torino, Italy Technische Universität Berlin, Germany
University of Bari, Italy Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische
University of Firenze, Italy Hochschule (RWTH) Aachen, Germany
University of Cagliari, Italy Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany
University of Calabria, Italy Technische Universität München, Germany
University of Bologna, Italy Humboldt-Universität Berlin, Germany
University of Genova, Italy Ruhr Universität Bochum, Germany
University of L’Aquila, Italy Ulm Universität, Germany
University of Messina, Italy Universität Jena, Germany
University of Milano, Italy Universität Leipzing, Germany
University of Napoli ‘Federico II’, Italy University of Stuttgart, Germany
University of Padova, Italy University of Alicante, Spain
University of Palermo, Italy Universitat Autònoma Barcelona, Spain
University of Parma, Italy University of Cantabria, Spain
University of Pavia, Italy University of Huelva, Spain
University of Perugia, Italy University of Navarra, Spain
University of Piemonte Orientale, Italy University of Oviedo, Spain
University of Roma ‘Tor Vergata’, Italy Universitat Rovira i Virgili (Tarragona), Spain
University of Salerno, Italy University of Santiago de Compostela, Spain
University of Torino, Italy University of Valladolid, Spain
University of Trieste, Italy University of Nova Gorica, Slovenia
University of Udine, Italy University of Lille, France
University of Venice ‘Ca’ Foscari’, Italy Jagiellonian University Kraków, Poland
University of Torino, Italy University of Varsavia, Poland
University of Trieste, Italy Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands
University of Udine, Italy Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 
NorwayUniversity of Venice ‘Ca’ Foscari’, Italy
Charles University of Prague, Czech Republic
73 European Clusters on Catalysis n.d.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology74•Adjacency
•Airlite
•Anglia Ruskin University
•Applied Emissions
•Arcinova
•Aston University
•AstraZeneca
•BASF
•Big Atom
•Biocatalysts
•Biotech Consultants Limited
•BP
•BPE-DS
•C-Tech Innovations
•Cadchem Te chnology Limited
•Cambridge Te ch Valley
•Carbon Clean Solutions
•Cardiff University
•CaRLa
•Catal International Ltd
•Catalysis Consulting
•CatSci
•CDT
•Centre for Process Innovation (CPI)
•Chemoxy
•C MAC
•Croda
•CT L
•De Montfort University
•Diamond Light Sour ce
•Drochaid Research Services
•Durham Univer sity
•Dwr Cymru
•EEN Swansea
•Eminox
•Enabled Future
•Energy Safety Research Institute•EPSRC
•Finden
•GJE Intellectual Property
•Green Lizard Technologies
•Greenshift Innovations
•GSK
•Hoare Lea
•Iconiq Innovation
•Immaterial
•Imperial College London/ROAR
•Impact Global Emission Solutions
•Innovate UK
•Intensichem
•Invista
•JM
•KBGL
•KCMC
•London South Bank University
•Lo owat
•Loughborough University
•Lucite
•Luxfer
•Malvern Panalytical
•Maturis Optimi Industrial Consulting
•Mempro
•Northumbrian Water
•Omnagen Lt d
•Oxford Biotrans
•Phigenesis
•PhosphonicS
•Pladis
•Plastic Energy
•PolyCatUK
•PQ Corporation
•PV3 Technologies
•Quantum Anvils
•Queen’s University Belfast10.A cknowledgements
The authors would like to thank: Innovate UK, Innovate UK/KTN Special Interest 
Group (SIG), EPSRC, the UK Catalysis Hub, SIG Advisory Group, visit attendees 
and host organisations, Enabled Future Ltd, one-to-one meetings and 
interviewed organisations, workshop speakers and attendees. A list of 
organisations involved is outlined below.
UK Catalysis: Innovation opportunities for an enabling technology75•Rapid Inno vation Group
•RealCat
•R ecycling Technologies
•R obinson Brothers
•Sabic
•Sainc E nergy
•SCI
•Se vern Trent
•SH V Energy
•SI No vation
•SMC
•St erling Pharma Solutions
•St oli Catalysts
•Str ata Technology
•T ata Steel
•The C AT Catalytic Centre
•Thomas S wan
•UCL
•UK Ca talysis Hub
•Ulst er University
•Unile ver
•Unit ed Utilities
•Univ ersity of Bath
•Univ ersity of Bristol
•Univ ersity of Cambridge
•Univ ersity of Edinburgh
•Univ ersity of Glasgow
•Univ ersity of Leeds
•Univ ersity of Liverpool
•Univ ersity of Manchester
•Univ ersity of Nottingham
•Univ ersity of Oxford
•Univ ersity of Southampton
•VT T
Head Office 
KTN
Suite 218 Business Design Centre 
52 Upper Street 
Islington 
London N1 0QH 
Telephone: 03333 403251 
Email: enquiries@ktn-uk.org 
ktn-uk.org 
@KTNUK
